My name is Andreas and in this video
we'll deploy an AI model to the cloud
and build a web app around it. The app
lets us test how big of an impact
specific genetic mutations will have in
causing diseases such as cancer. The
model we will deploy is EVO 2, which is
a newly released state-of-the-art
language model that can be used to
generate DNA and predict the impacts of
genetic variations. I have made sure
that everything in this video is free
for you, including the GPUs and cloud
compute required to host and run the
model. You will also not need a
biological background since I'll teach
all the biology prerequisites you'll
need for this video. The user first
selects a human genome assembly which is
a computational representation of the
human genome sequence. Next, the user
can search for specific genes. These
could be cancer related genes such as
tumor suppressors, but they can also
browse by chromosomes where the user can
pick a gene that appears in a certain
chromosome. After selecting a gene, we
will load the genetic variants that are
already known within the specific genes
from a public database. The already
known classification, such as pathogenic
or benign, is then shown. The user then
has the option to analyze the mutation
with the AI model and compare the AI's
classification with the database
classification. The entire nucleotide
sequence of the gene is also shown, and
it is possible to select a single
nucleotide and run an analysis on that
one to analyze its clinical
significance. Under each variation, it
is also possible to navigate to the
public databases to see even more
information about it. Likewise,
information is also pulled from public
databases about the selected gene. The
AI model we will use was released from
Stanford in February 2025 and is a large
language model for biology. But instead
of inputs and outputs being words like
with CGBT, EVO 2's input and output is a
sequence of ATGs and C's, which is what
a DNA string consists of. It has been
trained on many different organisms and
has learned the syntax of how DNA should
look. It is incredibly promising and
I'll break down many of the use cases
and concepts behind it from the report.
We will start by covering some basic
biology before moving on to the data
set. Here we will dive into the data set
and go in depth with features the model
learns in biology terms. In the report,
a large variety of different techniques
are used to determine if the model has
learned certain things. I'll break some
of these down since we can learn a lot
about AI from these. Then we'll talk
about how the model was trained. So
which models were trained and how does
the loss function work. We will check
out the pre-training and mid-training
phases. And I'll also break down how the
researchers adopted the model from an 8K
nucleotide context window and all the
way up to a 1 million nucleotide context
window. There lies some pretty cool
techniques behind this which we can
learn from. We will cover the trained
models use cases and I'll break down how
the model can be used for generation. We
will then cover how the model can be
guided with other AI models to generate
DNA sequences with specific properties.
Then we will cover scoring. So EVO 2's
prediction capabilities. Lastly, we will
finish off with how EVO 2's embeddings
can power the training of new AI models.
We'll take a look at how that might be
done using a practical example. We will
use serverless GPUs for developing and
deploying the AI model. And we'll check
out the pros and cons of serverless
versus using EC2. We will go in depth
with an example from the researchers
where Evil 2 is used to predict whether
a particular single nucleotide variant
of the BRCA1 cancer related gene is
likely to be harmful for the protein
function and thus potentially increase
the risk of cancer for the patient with
the genetic variant. We'll then adopt
these techniques from the example for
our web app. We'll talk about how to
calculate thresholds for pathogenic
versus benign as well as the confidence
in the score. Lastly, we'll go through
the user flow in the front end and where
we get our data from. Our AI model and
back end will be deployed completely for
free with serverless GPUs on model and
we'll use Nvidia H100 graphics cards on
the platform. We can check the status
and requests to our back end. We'll use
NextJS, React, Tailwind, Python and
other modern technologies. Now let's get
started. Let's start out with the basic
prerequisites in biology that we'll need
to understand why we use EVO 2 and then
also what it does. First of all, if you
search for EVO 2 and then find its
GitHub repository, you should be able to
go down and find the link to the
paper. Just let this verify and then
press download
PDF. When this has been downloaded, you
should be able to see the paper written
by the scientists who made EVO 2. This
one right here. So much of the content
from my skele slides is based off of the
content written in this report right
here. So, if you're interested, you can
go ahead and just read the report. Maybe
you understand some of it, maybe you
understand a lot, but at least my slides
will go in depth with why it works the
way it does. So, in this report right
here, you can see all of the same facts
that I'll be presenting, just more in
depth. I'll of course also add some more
facts about other topics, but this is
just so you know where I have all my
information from. Great. Let's start
with the DNA we see over here. So, over
here we see a double strand DNA string.
And a DNA string basically is just a
molecule. And this molecule is like a
recipe book or an instruction manual for
building out a full organism. So all
organisms have DNA strings. And these
determine what your eye color is for
example and then how all or every part
of your body works. So the recipe is
written in a pretty simple fourletter
chemical alphabet. So it consists of
A's, T's, G's and C's. And that is what
you see over here. A T's G's and C's.
And since it is double stranded, we'll
need to keep these strands together. And
this is done with base pairs. So A's
always bond with T's and G's always bond
with C's. In this way, the two strands
are kept together. So a DNA string
contains genes and these are specific
sequences that typically provide
instructions for building proteins that
can then do work within the body. Now we
have uh two different type of organisms
here. We have proarotes. So these are
simple organisms like bacteria for
example. And these typically just have a
single circular chromosome. So not a lot
of DNA is needed to encode organisms
that are simpler. We then also have
ukarotes right here. So ukarotes are
like plants or animals including us
humans, fungi or yeast. So the cells
right here are more complex. So this
means we'll also need more DNA to
actually encode the organisms. So humans
for example have 46 chromosomes which is
what we use to arrange the DNA in. So
just remember that proaryotes are simple
organisms and ukarotes are more complex
organisms. And then I also wrote here
that by DNA string we mean physical DNA
molecule because this DNA string is
actually stored in a physical DNA
molecule that is within every single
cell. Now imagine how many A ts G's and
C's will need to encode a human for
example. And also imagine that we'll
need to store this entire recipe within
every single cell which you have tons of
in in your body. So this these DNA
strings are obviously going to be very
long. So we'll need to pack them down
into a way that makes them pretty
compact. So if you folded out the DNA of
a single human, it would be meters long.
And that obviously doesn't just fit into
a cell if it's just folded out. So we
use chromosomes to or the body uses
chromosomes to efficiently package this
DNA into something that fits within the
cells. So the DNA strings aren't just
loosely lying around within the cells.
It is actually tightly wound around
proteins which we call histones. And
this is then further compacted around
structures like chromosomes. So for
humans there are 46 chromosomes or
distinct chromosomes and each of these
contains a segment of the overall DNA
string. So it's like splitting this
massive DNA string into 46 different
volumes basically. So when you hear
chromosomes mentioned further into the
video, this is what you have to remember
back to. Great. So let's move on to
genomes. Well, genomes is just another
word for the full DNA sequence across
all the 46 chromosomes for humans. So,
basically just the entire recipe book
for building a human or for building a
another organism for that sake. So,
there are genomes that have been
measured for multiple different
organisms and you can find these
reference genomes in databases on the
internet and then see all the individual
ATGs and C's and how they are ordered to
build out a human. So genomes just
contains all the information that an
organism needs to function and then also
reproduce. Okay, hopping back to the DNA
string. Here we can see the nucleotides.
So these were the ATGs and C's and these
are just the basic building blocks of
DNA strands. So they're just fundamental
units for carrying information about how
to build the organism. So these will of
course also be different from organism
to organism or even within the same
organism if there are mutations. So as
you see over here in the DNA string we
have the ATGC's divided into pairs.
These are called base pairs. So going
over here if the DNA is double stranded
then the strands. So this line right
here and this line right here will be
held together by these different
nucleotides that will pair. So A always
passed to T to T and then G always
passed to C. So if you know the entire
row of or the entire sequence of A to
GC's for one strand, you'll always also
know the entire sequence of the other
strand because they'll always pair in
this way. So there won't really be any
ambiguity at all. So this is what is
called a double helix. And this just
consists of two strands w winding around
each other like you see down here. So
when working with EVO 2 as well, what
we'll work with are single sequences of
ATGs and C's and therefore not pairs
because as I said these pairs will
always be complimentary to whatever they
are supposed to be. So A will always
pair to T etc and G always to C. So if
we just have a single sequence we'll
always be able to find out the other
strand over here. So we always just work
with a single sequence instead of pairs
because we can always derive the pairs
from the single sequence. So to just
summarize the basic prerequisites, DNA
strings are molecules of if ATGC's so
nucleotides that encode how life um is
produced. It can be simple life forms
such as bacteria called procarots or
more complex organisms like ukareotes
such as humans or animals. And since
these DNA strings can be extremely long
because of all the information needed to
encode a human, they're divided into
chromosomes. So each chromosome contain
a part of the DNA. So for humans we have
46 chromosomes and for other organisms
they can contain another amount of
chromosomes. When we talk about genomes
this is just the every genetic material
in an organism. So a human genome for
example would just be a sequence of all
the nucleotides to create a human. And
nucleotides are just the basic building
blocks of DNA strands. So the A T's G's
and C's. And in double stranded DNA DNA
over here they are put into pairs called
base pairs. So if you know one pair,
you'll also always know the other one
because T or A always pass to T and G
always pass to C. So these are the basic
units we work with before you can before
you can start to understand EVO 2 and
how that works as well. Before moving on
to the data set and how EVO 2 has been
trained, let's talk about what EVO 2
actually is. So we'll understand why we
need the data set that we do. Good. So
what is EVO 2? So EVO 2 it is a large
language model first of all. So it's a
large uh language
model just like chat GBT is. So what
chat GBT and other large language model
large language models uh do is that if
you give it some text so for example
this is some text then it'll be able to
predict the next token. So this is a
token for example this is a token and
this is another token. So if you give it
and and then just end it here and just
give this as the prompt to chat GBT,
it'll be able to predict the next token
and then continue with something like
and this is the second part. So this is
something that chat GBT will predict
from this over here. So just like normal
text is given to chat GBT for EVO 2,
we'll instead give it ATGC's and just
give it a long sequence of that. And
then what it'll do is just predict the
next sequence of that. So it'll just
predict more ATGs and C's in a sequence
that it finds fits well with the old
sequence or with the previous sequence.
So by taking all these genomes from
different organisms. So this could be
humans or animals, yeast for example and
all kinds of bacteria and then making
given all of these to a large language
model as training data. They then
trained a large language model to then
predict the next ATG GS and C's in a
sequence that it has been given for as
an input. So EVO 2 specifically has been
trained on over 9 trillion DNA letters
and it has also been trained on DNA
letters from all kinds of life. So both
from single bacteria to complex humans.
So hopping into the repository here for
example, it has been trained um across
all domains of life. So all kinds of
organisms it has it knows about. So it
isn't just applicable to humans but also
a bunch of different organisms that is
that it has been trained on. Great. So
what the researchers has done with EVO 2
is that because they have trained the
model on this many DNA sequence
sequences or ATGC's EVO 2 the large
language model has then learned the
syntactical correctness of the ATGs and
C's. So if you give it an ATG or C, it
won't just randomly predict the next ATG
and C. It'll then actually predict
something that would fit into the gene.
So to build a large language model like
EVO 2, they the researchers behind this
model needed a bunch of training data.
So we'll just take a look at the data
set and then also how it was trained.
Good. So hopping over here to the data
set. The researchers created a data set
called Open Genome 2. So this was about
8.8 8 trillion tokens of nucleotides.
So, ATGs and C's in just a long sequence
of strings. And this data set was was
created and released by the authors of
the model. So, not some external
researchers. Both the data set and the
model was created by these researchers.
So, when training this EVO 2 model, the
researchers behind the model used a
two-part training strategy. The first
part is called pre-training and the
second part is called mid-training. So
for this pre-training section right
here, the training data was limited to
much smaller sequences containing
bacterial genes for example, so
proariots instead of huge um organisms
like a yeast chromosomes or human
chromosomes. This can be or sorry the
difference between the pre-training and
the mid-training can be compared kind of
to reading one book at a time versus
reading one page at a time. So for the
pre-training the model was given one
page at a time. So learning the shorter
stories and then when the model had
learned a bunch from those one pages at
a time they didn't they then gave the
model an entire book at a time to also
teach it um larger organism sequences
such as yeast chromosomes. So with
pre-training they gave the model 8k
context an 8k context window. So what
this means is that they gave it up to
8,000 nucle nucleotides at a time um
when learning to predict the next
nucleotide. So when working with a
context window of 8,000 nucleotides, the
model isn't big enough to or the model's
context window isn't isn't big enough to
learn about these organisms over here,
but it is big enough to learn about
bacterial genes, tRNA, and these smaller
sequences that you might find within
this range. So we basically just teach
the model the fundamentals. And then
when the model has learned the
fundamentals, the researchers then teach
the model the larger organisms. So the
scale just for reference is small
organisms to the left and large
organisms to the right based on how many
nucleotides they contain. The specifics
about what is learned during
pre-training training versus what is
learned during mid training I'll come
back to a little bit later in these
slides from in excel draw just so you
understand fully why the research is
divided into two parts like this. So
let's first look at the pre-training
part of this training. So for the
pre-training part, the model has been
limited to 8,000 nucleotides context
window and then it has to predict the
next ATGSE within that sequence. So with
this pretty small context window, the
basics of the DNA grammar can be
learned. So for example, if we relate
this to a chatbt clone, if you were to
train a chatbt large language model
where it predicts letters, for example,
in the English language, if you gave it
smaller context windows like this, the
pre-training might teach the model how
to spell with the English language. So
the model might be able to spell basics
of DNA grammar like this, just like the
B basics and fundamentals of the English
language. And then when expanding to
mid-training, the model might be taught
a specific knowledge that can then
express with the fundamental knowledge
that it learned within the pre-training
section. So that was kind of the idea
with pre-training and mid-training.
Also, some of these patterns of ATGs and
C's because these can be arranged into
different patterns can then also be
picked up by the model in pre-training.
So with this bacterial gene, for
example, it might be small enough to be
fully contained within an 8K context
window. And the patterns that might be
contained within that sequence might
also be picked up and learned by the
model already in pre-training. But for
the patterns for these large organisms,
they might have to be taught during mid
training because the context window is
smaller is too small for the model to
pick up the patterns already. In these
sections down here, I would like to talk
about some of the tests that have been
done in the report post training to
validate the effectiveness effectiveness
of the pre-training up here. So while
these tests are done post-training, the
knowledge being tested um is precisely
the kind of information that the model
would have picked up during the
pre-training phase. So these tests down
here can therefore serve as an
illustration that the pre-training phase
pre-training stage was successfully done
and that the model actually did learn
the crucial basics of the DNA grammar.
So as I mentioned earlier over here, if
you have a sequence of a T's, G's and
C's, these can code different things. So
one part of the eight of the sequence
might code for a specific protein while
another part of the pro while another
part of the sequence will code for
another protein. So with that in mind,
let's hop over here and talk about
codons. So codons are a fundamental unit
of the genetic code and codons consist
of three nucleotides that encode an
amino acid. So proteins consists of
amino acids. So you might have a
sequence of codons that will then code
the entire protein by coding for each
specific amino acid in an order. So most
of these codons specify which amino
acids should be added next when building
a protein. And remember proteins are the
molecules that perform the tasks in the
cell as we talked about earlier over
here. So let's say we have a sequence of
ATGs and C's like this. Then this could
be a specific codon for a specific amino
acid. This could
be, let me just mark this. This could
then be the next amino acid in the
protein. This could be the next amino
acid in the protein. But how do we know
when to start coding the protein? So for
this, there's something called start and
stop codons. So these are the signals
that are used for marking the beginning
and end of the protein coding. So this
is one of the patterns that I talked
about up here. So this is only three
different nucleotides. But imagine you
have a sequence that is maybe a million
in context window or a million
nucleotides long. Well then in that case
three nucle nucleotides in that sequence
is a very small pattern and it might be
hard for the model to pick up if it were
given a million nucleotides. So with the
pre-training by giving it only an 8k
context window it might be more
efficient for learning these smaller
patterns consisting of only these three
nucleotides for the start and stop
codons. for example, then giving it a
million nucleotides and then hoping it
picks up these small patterns of only
free nucleotide nucleotides. So after
training the entire model both with
pre-training and mid-training uh
checking if the model has learned the
patterns of start and stop codons we can
actually verify or the researchers could
actually verify whether the pre-training
was done successfully because if it was
done successfully then the model should
be able to know these start and stop
codons because because it has been
taught the patterns. So the researchers
wrote a little bit in the report about
how they can check whether it has
learned about these start and stop
codons. So to figure this this out we
have to take a look at what the
capabilities of the model of the model
is. So going into the GitHub right here
we can see what it is able to do. One
thing it can do is a forward. So this is
called scoring. Another one is
generation. So this is what we basically
do with CHBT. We give it a sequence of
letters. So this one for example for
JGBT if we use that example and then
it'll be able to generate the next
letters in the sentence. So that is what
we do with generation just we just
predict the next ATG and C from a
previous sequence of ATGC's that is
generation. The other one is scoring. So
with scoring you can give it a sequence
and then you can get the model to
predict how likely it is that the T is
actually the correct letter that is
supposed to be after a C and G. So we
can give it a a letter like this in a
sequence and then the model will score
how syntactically correct that the that
it is that the T comes after the A C and
G. So that is basically scoring. So if
we take go back to the example with
chatgbt if we give chat GBT evo 2 can
generate and then we also give it the
token DNA then chat GBT would be able to
score how likely it is that DNA comes
after EVO2 can generate versus if we for
example put in a totally unrelated work
word like lamp. So EVO 2 can generate
lamp well then lamp the word lamp would
get a lower lower score than the word
DNA because DNA is more syntactically
correct in this context. So that is
basically what scoring means up here.
Good. So hopping back, how can we use
these two features to check whether the
model has learned about these codons or
not? Well, we can use the scoring and
just to uh we read what I have written
here. Um since another one is scoring.
So the feature scoring since we are able
to generate ATGs and C's, EVO 2 has
learned the DNA syntax rules. I really
want to hammer that down. Therefore, EVO
2 or we can give EVO 2 an input and have
it score how well each nucleotide
conforms to the patterns learned. So to
solve this problem, we can use these
steps. The first step is put in the give
it a sequence where we put in the
correct codeons and then get the score
out. So maybe we put in a sequence where
the codons actually correct and
correspond to how it would look in real
life. This will then give us a score for
that sequence. Step two is we do the
same but we create a little mutation in
the codon. So we take the same sequence
then we change one of the one of the a
g's and c's to another one. So maybe we
change the g to an a. So now it's a a ac
instead of a gc. And this is obviously
incorrect. So the model should have
learned this and then score that
sequence lower. So now that we have a
score for the correct sequence and for
the incorrect sequence, we can then take
a look at the average score or sorry the
difference between those two scores and
see if there is a difference. And this
can be done with a heat map plot for
example where the colors are more red
whenever the difference is larger. So
the model should assign lower scores now
because there is a bigger difference
with this mutation. So this basically
just means that it is more syntactically
incorrect because the model has learned
the patterns and the syntax of how ATGCS
is supposed to be structured. So if we
see lower scores where these codons are,
this would then confirm that EVO2 has
picked up about what a codon actually
is. um because the protein is spelled
incorrectly and the model knows that the
protein is spelled incorrectly. So let's
take a look at one of the diagrams from
the report. So this is basically just a
mutation analysis that was done like I
explained up here. So what we see in
this diagram first of all is a heat map.
So on the x-axis right here we have a
sequence of nucleotides. So this is part
of a protein coding sequence and then we
have different nucleotides for each one
of these ticks. So this could be an
ATGC, this could be an ATGC, etc. And
then because codons consist of three
nucleotides, then there is a code on 1 2
3 4 blah blah all the way up to seven.
So the first colon would be 1 2 3
nucleotides which match up which matches
up with what we explained up here. So
over here they explain delta likelihood.
So this symbol right here means delta
likelihood which means the change in the
scores from when they introduced the
mutation compared to the reference. So
if the mutation is really bad then the
likelihood will be pretty large or sorry
the delta likelihood would be larger and
the color would be more bright because
the model knows that the mutation is bad
and again the model knows that this
mutation isn't correct because it has
learned this learned the syntax rules of
where codons are supposed to be from the
pre-training. So first of all we have
different species right here. So we have
simple species up here like E.coli and
then we have homo sapiens down here
which are the humans and since the since
the x-axis is um nucleotides so just a
sequence on the xaxis x xaxis right here
what this five UTR means is just a
region before the coding so there is a
region right here and then there is
another region in the sequence right
here which is the coding region so this
region I have marked right here is the
region that starts coding for that
specific protein. So we therefore see a
start code on right here. So start of
amino coding. So that is what we see
right here. So when introducing
mutations into the start codon of the
part of the sequence that marks the
start codon. So this part of the
sequence right here. And then comparing
the sequence that has been mutated
compared to the sequence that is a
reference sequence. So a sequence that
is actually correct. We see that the
model picks up that the difference in
scores is pretty big. So this means that
the model can actually detect whether
the syntax is correct or not. Because if
we introduce a mutation into a start
codon, the model knows that oh that
probably isn't correct right in that
place where the start code codon is
supposed to be. So we'll give it a a
worse score. And because we know that
this place right here is the start
codon, we can then verify that the model
has picked up what a start codon is and
that this pattern actually does exist.
So this region over here, the five UTR
region doesn't really contain the codon
in or sorry the information about the
codon encoding like this region over
here does but it does have some
information about how the gene is turned
into protein and as you see the
mutations can also be learned and
detected over here. So it probably
contains some pattern that the EVO 2
model has picked up on. And this can
then also be detected that the model has
learned these patterns from using the
same mutation analysis where we compare
a reference sequence with a mutation
sequence and then check whether the
model picked up on any difference on the
in the scores. So the key observations
we just want to make here is that the
model is extremely sensitive to almost
all species. So both the ecoli and all
the way up to human homo sapiens. So
humans. So across multiple species
because as I said before the model has
been trained on multiple species as they
describe it'll be able to pick up these
mutations within all of these species
and the model also clearly picks up the
importance of the start signal since
that is the lightest part of this
sequence right here. And then we also
see this periodic pattern every three
nucleotides. So right here, right here,
right here, right here and so on so
forth corresponding to each codon. As we
also see the two first nucleotides in a
codon, so this one right here for
example, causes larger changes in the
likelihood over here than in the third
nucleotide right here, you know, of a
codon. And as far as my research goes,
um changes in the third position often
also don't change the amino acid.
Meaning that the model has probably
picked up that changes in the third in
the third nucleotide in a codon right
here makes less of a difference to the
end result of the protein produced
compared to changing the two first
nucleotides in the codon. So it has
learned these very small and fundamental
patterns in how DNA is encoded. So just
to summarize by systematically mutating
sequences um like we like has been done
right here then observing how the score
changes for the scoring feature with the
EVO 2 model it can then be confirmed
that EVA 2 has learned this fundamental
structure of codons so start codons and
then also codons and which parts of the
codon codons are most important and this
is then done for both the small
organisms all the way up to homo
sapiens. So it has learned this across a
large variety of species. So, since this
is what it should be able to pick up in
the pre-training up here because it's so
small, such small changes, it helps
indicate whether the pre-training was
successful or not. And if you're
interested in how this scoring works,
this is what we'll work with later on in
the video when we actually build out the
tool. But for now, this is just a
snippet from the GitHub of scoring of
the scoring feature. So, how it
basically works is that you create a new
instance of the model right here, which
will then load the model file into
memory. This is EVO 2 7 billion
parameters. Then you give it a sequence.
So a sequence could be a cg and t. Then
you can run scoring by running
EVO2 model. So what we instantiated up
here along with the input ids. So the
sequence that has been tokenized. And
the output down here would then be the
likelihood across the DNA sequence. So
AC G and T. So what they did was they
just took the sequence or what they did
up here just to make myself clear was
they took this sequence of AC G and T.
So let's say ACT andG was correct. Then
they ran the score. They ran this code
once. Then they got a score out. Then
they changed the C maybe to a G. So now
it's a GGT. So we introduced the
mutation that is wrong. Then you run
this entire code again. Get out another
score. Then just compare how big the
difference is between those two scores.
And then if difference is big then there
is a large likelihood. So the color is
light or large difference in the
likelihood. So the color is very light.
Otherwise, the color is dark because the
model didn't really pick up any
differences. So, the score goal would be
kind of the same. So, that is kind of
how they did this test right here with
codeons. Going down further, we can also
talk about introns and exxons. So, just
to give you an idea about what introns
and exxons are. If I just create a
random sequence like this, this might be
a DNA sequence. So, a gene is one long
sequence, but it might not be
continuous. So maybe we have a specific
gene that codes for something and then
that genes is that gene is contained
right here and then it also it is also
continued right here. So these three
parts right here aren't actually what
codes for the gene. So it is
differentiated between what parts of a
sequent sequence codes for the gene and
what part of the sequence does not code
for the gene. So exxons is called
express regions and these are the
segments of a gene. So maybe this part
right here that actually does code for
the for the gene. So they hold the
instructions um necessary to build the
the protein. So the codons and these are
the essential and important uh steps to
be able to construct this protein. And
then there are also introns over here.
This uh means intervening regions. So if
this was the exxon right here, then
these three nucleotides that does not
code for that protein, it can be called
an intron. So the introns are located
between the exxons but still within a
gene sequence. And these inrons do not
code for the final protein. So while
they are part of the initial gene
transcript, they are removed later when
the actual protein should be
synthesized. So just to try and rephrase
that as a simple example, if you are
watching a movie, then you're only
obviously interested in the movie and
the story line. So the introns would
then be the ads in the movie. So they're
part of the movie, but they aren't
really what matters within the movie.
They aren't part of story line. It's a
completely different thing. So just to
rephrase that in a more scientific way
as well, exxons or sorry DNA is a long
sequence. So exxons are part of the gene
that contains the valid coding sequence.
So this is what we actually need to
build the protein. And then inrons are
the parts in the gene between exxons
that does not code for the protein but
are just there. So an illustration down
here shows the exxons. So the red, red,
and red parts does code for the actual
protein we would like to produce. And
the introns are still part of the
sequence and the gene right here, but
they don't really matter in the in the
in the RNA later on. So as you see what
happens, the introns are just removed at
one point and then all that is left is
the exxons right here, which is the
actual coding sequence. So because EVO 2
needs to learn the syntax of how DNA
works, it obviously also needs to be
able to recognize the difference between
exxons and introns. So these introns
between the exxons that actually does
matter can be highly variable in length.
So they can vary between maybe tens or
hundreds of nucleotides all the way up
to maybe hundreds of thousands of
nucleotides. So taking this back to the
pre-training if the pre-training only
has let me just make this a little bit
smaller and just delete this
again right there.
So if the pre-training only has a
context window that allows the model to
accept a sequence in this length, then
obviously we won't be able to see all
the exxons that is required to code the
gene. But the model might fundamentally
be able to learn that there is a border
between an exxon and an intron right
here. So the model might be able to
learn the borders between exxons and
introns but not actually which exxons
correspond to each other and are
related. So whenever we have a training
that is mid training so the mid training
might have this entire context right
here then the mid training might be able
to see oh this exxon relates to this
exxon and this exxon relate to this
exxon. So those are the two different
things you might expect to see or might
expect the model to pick up between the
pre-training right here and then the the
mid-training and ultimately the model
should then be able to distinguish
between whether we are in an exxon or an
intron given a position in a sequence.
So just a single nucleotide
position. So one way that we can
differentiate between introns and exxons
given a single position. So just if you
just give a single nucleide position
like this the model should then be able
to classify whether we are in an intron
or an exxon. So one way you can be able
to do this is also explained in the
report and that is by using something
called embeddings and that is another
feature in EVO 2. So going down here all
the way down to embeddings that is
another feature apart from forward and
then generation. So what is embedded?
Well here it says EVO 2 embeddings can
be same save safe for use downstream. So
just with like with four down here you
instantiate the model tokenize the
sequence of ACGC's and then you score a
sequence but instead of just getting the
outputs like you do up here in the
scoring you also get out the embeddings
and the embeddings are the model's
internal representation of the sequence
within its hidden layers. So we can just
go ahead and hop over to a later section
which I'll come back to later as well
just for so you know that and just talk
about embeddings. So this is one of the
features that EVO 2 has. So right down
here we have a neural network. We have
some input nodes right here, some output
nodes and then we have the hidden layers
in here that contains the model's hidden
state of the input layers between the
inputs and the outputs. So the model
will get some input numbers do some
transformation to those inputs numbers
with the with its weights and biases and
then take those input numbers and output
them in some way. So an embedding is
just taking one of the representation of
the inputs within one of the layers of
the model. So if we go back to the
GitHub, that is what they do right here.
They pick that that the layer blocks 28
MLP 13. So that is just a random layer
from the architecture of the model.
Although they haven't picked that layer
randomly, they have probably thought
well about which one to pick out. And
the reason you might want to use these
embeddings is that these embeddings,
although they're just numbers, might
express the input sequence better than
the input sequence sequence does itself.
So let's say the input sequence is just
ATG and C. Well, then inside the
embeddings, it might be a bunch of
numbers, just random numbers, which are
the internal representation of the ATGs
and C's after being run through these
layers. So even though we aren't able to
decrypt what these numbers actually mean
as a human, the model might know that
this contains information about what
introns are there, what exxons are
there, and all of this syntactical
knowledge that the EVO2 model has
learned through its training. So going
up here, EVO 2 might be able to capture
more accurate features in its embeddings
than other other models are. Therefore,
uh EVO2's embeddings would be more
precise. So for if you want to train a
model to classify whether you are in an
intron or an exxon given a specific
position, it more it might be more
accurate or might give you better
results if you give it an embedding of a
model like EVO 2 because it contains
information about intron exxon and
everything that the model has learned
except instead of just giving it the
input sequence ATG and C. So, EVO2
embeddings, for example, reflect
knowledge about codons um or inrons and
exxons more the raw data itself would do
just because it has it has learned all
of these
informations. Well, what can we then use
this for? You might ask. Well, if we
want to build out another model that can
classify whether we inside or outside an
exxon given a position, we can then use
EVO2's embeddings as inputs for the
model instead of just the raw data. So,
the position and sequence maybe. And
they actually explain in the paper how
they how they do this. So going down to
page five, we can take a look at these
diagrams. So what they did in the report
was that they build an Exxon
classification model. So they built a
much simpler model than just the evil 2
model. And the input for this model is
an input sequence. So a sequence of
nucleotide sorry nucleotides. And the
output is a likelihood. So a number
between zero and one about how likely it
is that we are inside an exxon. So it
will then use the extracted embeddings
from the EVO2 model. And then right
here, the blue parts are an exxon and
then an exxon over here as well. And
then the white part between the blue
parts is an intron. So this means that
if you give it the position right here,
then it should predict one because we're
inside an exxon. If you give it a
position inside or between the exxons,
so in the intron, then it should predict
zero. And then again, if you give it a
another position inside another exxon,
it should then predict one. So we can
then also see over here how the model
train using the embeddings embedding
step. So looking at the labels an exxon
the dark gray part right here this is an
exxon this is an exxon and then over
here on the y- axis we see the scores.
So this is zero for an intron and this
is one for an exxon. So we can see that
it predicted high scores close to one if
we're inside xron sorry exxons and it
then predicted low scores closer to zero
if we're inside introns. So that is how
the model or sorry that is how it can be
verified that EVO2 actually did learn
the difference between introns and
exxons and the reason we know this is
because it is obviously embedded
embedded within the embeddings or the
hidden states of the EVO2 model which
can then in itself be used to train
other simpler AI models to classify
whether we are inside or outside an
exxon. So that is how it can be verified
that the pre-training was successfully
done for learning introns and exxons
like this. So again, these AI models are
great at learning patterns. So just like
this up here with the codons is a
pattern. This down here with the introns
and exxons is just a pattern. So if the
model is able to be taught patterns such
as what is an intron and what is an
exxon, it might be useful for working or
working with or training other models in
the future that also deals with introns
and exxons because we can utilize or
leverage the knowledge that EVO 2 has
from reading all of these different
nucleotides in its training data.
Another thing that is probably also part
of the pre-training phase and learning
the fundamental DNA grammar are promoter
motives down here. So promoter motives
marks the start of a gene in a DNA
sequence. So let's say we have a DNA
sequence like this. Well, the gene might
start right here and then the promoter
motive will be some part of the sequence
right before that. So just how codons up
here mark the start of a protein with a
start codon. The promoter motives down
here mark the start of the entire gene.
So it's like a start reading here sign
right before the genes begin. And this
8K context window of nucleotides might
be enough to actually see both the
promoter motive and also the gene that
starts right after. So being able to
teach the model that a promoter motive
actually marks the start of a gene
because it fits within the context
window. So hopefully the model can learn
what is usually written before a gene
begins. So it'll learn the concept of
promoter motives. Good. So down here
there is a pretty small diagram from
Wikipedia and the only thing I just
wanted to show you is the promoter
motive right here, the orange part and
then there is a gene right after. So a
promoter motive is just a part of the
sequence right here that comes right
before the gene. The rest you can just
ignore. But I just wanted to show you
that it starts reading from the promoter
motive and forward. So in the report
they actually tested whether the model
has learned these promoter motives and
they used a more advanced technique
called sparse autoenccoders to actually
test this. So this isn't what like what
we have seen before and talked about
before with mutation analysis for
example. This is a more advanced
technique which you can learn about both
here in the report and also online by
searching for it. But here in figure F
in figure uh sorry here in figure four
and then figure F you can see that it
actually did learn how to detect these
promoter motives. So the x-axis down
here marks the distance from the
transcription site. So where it should
start reading from. So going back here,
this is the transcription site where it
should start reading. The promoter
motives then marks the area right before
the transcription site. So over here
that is as close to the transcription
site as possible as you see with the
gray color right here. And then the
promoter motives are what is being
detected right here before as these lit
up color bars right before the
transcription sites. And they also found
that where the model lights up. So where
the model detects these promoter
motives, these sequences also correspond
to the motives that are actually known.
So specific uh sequences of ATGs and C's
that corresponds to how motives actually
look in real life. So this was just
another piece of knowledge that the
model probably learned during
pre-training just so you know what the
model likely learns during both
pre-training and also mid-training down
here. So in mid-raining the model is
trained on longer sequences. So it's
given maybe multiple genes at a time. So
during pre-training the context window
is only 8,000 nucleotides. So using only
these 8,000 nucleotides might might be
fine to teach it the basic grammar of
DNA. And it's also way less expensive
computationally since there's much less
data to uh to compute. But it also
doesn't teach the model the large
picture about massive genomes. So let's
say I want to feed it an entire genome
containing multiple genes. Well, maybe
there is a relation between two genes
within that genome. So only giving it
part of one gene obviously won't teach
the model the relation between those
genes within the genome. So by using
this larger mid-training phase as well,
these more full picture relations can be
taught to the model. So this of course
uh is about handling complex sequences
first of all. So remember ukarot
ukarotic cells well these are the
complex cells such as those within
humans for example. Well, there might be
patterns between different genes within
these ukarotic cells. So, by just
looking at these small fragments that
would be looked at with only the
pre-training window, well, those larger
patterns can't really be understood. So,
their intricacies aren't well understood
by just looking at small fragments of
these DNA strings. So, I have a little
analogy over here. So, it's like
understanding a whole book by reading
only one page of the book. So one page
might be the 8k context window whereas
the whole book might be the million
nucleotide context window. So that is
kind of the difference between the
pre-training and the mid training. So
during pre pre-training if introns are
super long then the model won't really
learn much about the exxons which
actually encode the genes. So we need
more context. So let's say you feed the
model a sequence of 8,000 nucleotides
for the training data for example. Well,
if those 8,000 nucleotides happen to be
part of an intron, well, then it doesn't
really learn about the nucleotides that
actually does code for the gene. So, the
nucleotides within the exxon. So, by
giving it a larger context window, it
can have both the nucleotides from the
intron and the exxon and then learn
which actually code for the gene. And
again, the larger context window also
allows the model to learn the
relationship between different genes
because they might be related across
large distances, sorry, distances. Also,
what a model can be used for after
training largely depends on what the
model was actually trained on. So, to be
able to generate or score sequences that
are longer than just the 8,000
nucleotides, you would like to train the
model on sequences that are longer than
these 8,000 nucleotides just so we able
to use the model for predicting or
scoring sequences even longer just these
8,000 nucleotides when actually using
inference with the model. Another thing
that can be taught during mid training
is the knowledge of regulators. So
different cells need different proteins
and also different amounts of proteins.
So even though each cell contains the
entire recipe or the entire DNA and all
chromosomes for building the entire
human, specific cells only need a part
of this entire genome. So therefore,
specific genes can be silenced or
enhanced to control what proteins are
produced within that specific cells and
how many of these proteins are actually
produced. So this means that genes
aren't always turned on and there are
therefore enhancers that can boost genes
protein production. There are also
silencers that can decrease gene
activity. So these are kind of like
volume controls for genes. So when
looking at a DNA string like this or
just a a sequence of ATS and C's, you
might expect the gene to be right here
for example and then the silencer or
enhancer part of the sequences to be
right after the gene such that it is
known the gene to be interpreted along
with how much it should be silenced or
enhanced. So you would expect all these
information to be right next to each
other, right? Well, in reality these
this information so the gene and then
the silencers can be hundreds of
thousands of base pairs away. So this
will take up a lot of context. So
because these genes and silences and
enhancers can be that far away from each
other in this long sequence of HD GS and
C's, this can't really be taught to the
model that there is a relationship
between these parts of the sequence in
this pre-training window. It'll have to
be taught to the model in the
mid-training window that allows for much
more context. So physically a DNA
molecule like this can loop around such
that if this is just the long sequence
of AGs and C's, this is just like a long
linear sequence. Well, this can
physically loop around such that the
gene can be brought close together to
the regulator such as the silencer or
the enhancer. But because we just work
with the long linear sequence of ATGs
and C's when working with nucleotides
and AI, for example, we don't really
know that the that the gene is looped
around, we just see the entire sequence
as one linear string instead of this
looping around motion. So the DNA
molecule can loop bringing these two
close to each other. But we can't really
see that in the nucleotide string though
because we just see the long linear
string. So in real life even though the
gene and regulators are super far apart
on the DNA strand they are brought close
close to each other by by folding of the
strand. So to actually teach the model
that there is a relationship between the
gene and the regulator even though we
just see this long linear string a large
context window is needed to teach the
model the relationship between or teach
the model of the relationship between
the genes and the regulators even though
they are far apart. So this is another
obvious reason for having this
mid-training phase as well. So let's hop
down and take a look at the distribution
between the pre-training and the
mid-training phase during the training.
So as we can see from this diagram in
the report far more tokens are consumed
during pre-training than during
mid-training. So the reason is that
during pre-training the model needs to
learn everything from scratch. So the
fundamentals of the grammar itself and
then in mid training it has already
learned this fundamental language this
so the DNA syntax and it just needs to
adapt to patterns that it then sees in
the training data on a larger scale. So
down here on the diagram we can see that
the difference is pretty big.
Pre-training takes up most of the
nucleotides of the training data and mid
training then takes up a much smaller
part as you see on both models right
here. So just to summarize, the
pre-training uses massive amounts of
data with a much shorter context window
to build a pretty robust understanding
of the DNA rules and just the DNA
grammar from scratch basically. And the
mid-training phase then uses a smaller
uh amount of the total training data set
but with a much longer and much more
expensive context window. And this is
then to adapt the model and teach the
model longrange patterns across entire
genes or between genes even. And these
are things that wasn't possible to be
trained within the pre-training phase.
Another consideration that can be made
for why there is both a pre-training and
mid-training phase is that training in
the mid-training phase is most likely
much more expensive than training in the
pre-training phase because you have to
handle that much more data. So it might
be unnecessary to use this massive
context window that was used in
mid-training for learning just the
fundamentals of the DNA syntax that can
be learned with a much shorter context
window that is also much cheaper as was
done right here in the pre-training
phase. So that likely also contributed
to the decision about why there is both
a pre-training and a mid-training phase.
So let's just take a look at why not
just train on human DNA instead of just
training on all these different
organisms that is shown right here in in
the paper as well. So the only human
genome that was trained on in the
training data set for the EVO2 model is
the human reference genome. So this
human reference genome is one long
sequence based on measurements about how
the human genome should look to not
contain variance basically. So
measurements have been made on actual
humans to see what the human genome
looks like and then one long sequence
has been made from that and that is then
the human reference genome and then the
rest of the genomes comes from other
organisms. So these are then also part
of the data set. So in the paper they
train or they tried the model EVO 2 on
the BRCA2 cancer data set and this is a
data set that contains varants and
mutations that the model can then
predict whether is is bad or good. So
let's say you have a DNA sequence like
this. Then a data set such such as this
one would then say oh what if this is
changed to an A for example and then it
would have a label that says okay this
is harmful or this is not harmful. So
this way mutations can be labeled just
for pre-reference to what this means. So
when given this BRCA2 cancer data set
with these variants, the model could
predict that the variance found in the
data set was harmful without having been
fine-tuned to the BRCA data set before.
And it performs even better than the
existing specialized model to predict
how harmful these variants are. So since
this EVO2 model hasn't been fine-tuned
to the BRCA2 data set variants, it
obviously must have learned that these
variants are harmful from some other
source. So this is obviously the
multiecies or all the different species
that has been a part of the train gator
that it has then learned this from. So
having been trained on so many other
species the broad knowledge um of this
train get then has then helped the EVO 2
model um perform better for cases like
this because it has so many different
species to look at when actually doing
this assessment. And this brings us to
multiecies variation. So, Evo 2 has
learned what parts of DNA change a lot
across species and what part sorry, and
what parts stay stay very similar. I'll
just say stay right here. So, the parts
that often stay very similar should
therefore be more functionally important
since they often are the same across
different organisms. So, variations
within these different sequences or
parts of sequences are then also more
likely to be harmful.
So variations in these parts of the
BRCA2 data set are detected will help
from having been trained on many
species. And this is pretty cool because
having a model like EVO 2 that has been
trained on maybe a mouse and also a
mammoth, it is able to use this
information from these other species to
actually predict whether a variation in
a BRCA 2 gene is harmful or not. So this
is a pretty cool thing that they found
out in in this Evo 2 research paper. And
in the paper they write themselves
notably the only human genome in the
open genome 2. So the data set is the
reference genome and EVO 2 achieves this
zero shot performance without any human
variant training but instead leveraging
multiecies variation as a proxy for
evolutionary constraints and a
constraint or what they mean by
constraints right here is for example
that if you change a specific or create
a specific mutation in this BRCA2 gene
then that would be a constraint because
it might be harmful. So hopefully that
cleared up a little bit about the data
set that was used for training EVO 2 and
then also what EVO 2 is supposed to
learn from this data set. But to go more
in depth with the actual training and
how to carry out the training itself,
let's take a look at this section over
here. So for the model itself, EVO 2 was
released in several different sizes. So
primarily a large 40 billion parameter
model and then also a smaller one that
is 7 billion parameters and then the
super small one with only 1 billion
parameters. So more parameters generally
mean a more powerful model but it also
contains more consistent resources. So
more GPU memory to actually run these
models and it also takes much more or
requires much more training data to
actually train these models. So they
will probably be even more smarter if
they have more parameters. So this table
right here from the report shows how
many parameters each one of these models
have and then also how many tokens was
used for training data down here. So for
this 40 billion parameter model we had 9
or sorry they had 9.3 trillion uh
nucleotides and for the smaller one it
was 2.4 and then you can also see how
many layers were in this neural network
for each of these models. So we'll
primarily work with this one for this
video right here but uh you can also
work with this one if you do require
even more processing power even more
accurate results from the tool which we
will build. So all the code for actually
building the model, training it and
running inference with it is actually
public on GitHub. So over here you can
see it. It's entirely open source and it
was built from or with a repository
called vortex or tool called vortex um
and then train on top of that. And then
the actual architecture of the model is
based on something called striped hyena
2 which is also a modern architecture
that was um built partly to train models
such as EVO 2. So I won't go much into
depth with that. You can look into both
uh striped hyena and also vortex if
you'd like to. But let's hop back here.
So with vortex what you do is that for
each model you would like to train you
do go in and create a configuration
file. So yiml file where you can define
a different layers you would like in the
model and then vortex can help take care
of some of the hard work for you. So
let's just first take a look at how
inference is running with the model and
then we can take take a look at how the
actual training is done below. So
inference is done with the forward
method right here. So a forward method
in a neural network is just the most
basic building block of all model
operations. So a forward method received
the tokenized sequences as a tensor.
Then an output logits. So this is just
the raw output of the model. So a logit
is the following. So there is one logit
for each possible token. So a t g and c
and also short combinations of these.
And then each log logit has a score for
how likely that token is to be the next
one in the sequence. So let's say we
have a sequence of a tgs and c's well
then there might be a logit of of c of g
for example and then this one will have
a score of how likely this is to be the
next one in the sequence after a tg and
c. So that that is log logit and that is
basically just the row output of the
model. So this makes sense for how to
use the scoring function since the
scoring function outputs how likely it
is that that sequence is syntactically
correct. So that score up here that it
outputs is just the score of how
syntactically correct um that sequence
is. So a simple call like this is then
used for scoring. But if you want to do
actual generation so what you might see
with JGBT where it generates the next
tokens as you see right here then you
can call a generate function. And how
that works is that it calls vortex
generate where you pass in the input
sequence and then this vortex function
tokenizes the input sequence, makes
multiple auto reggressive calls. So this
means that this function right here
keeps calling the forward function where
it scores what token is most likely to
be the next one and then appends that
most likely token to the sequence. So
when looking at a a an existing sequence
and then predicting the next one and and
you keep doing that, you call that auto
reggressive because you look at the
previous sequence. And after having done
this a couple of times or as many times
as you want, it will then just return
the predicted sequence. So the fully
generated sequence and not just the
logits, so the scores for the different
tokens. And I just want to clear one
thing up. tokenization as it says right
here and also here means that it takes a
sequence such as ACGC right here and
then it turns it into a tensor which is
just a matrix that the computer is able
to understand. So the computer isn't
inherently able to understand ACS and
C's and doesn't have much meaning but a
tensor where this has been turned into
numbers that the computer can work with
makes more uh sense for the computer. So
that is just the process of tokenization
and then also a note I made over here of
auto reggressive. So a more formal
definition maybe is that also regressive
means predicting the next part of a
sequence based on the previous sequence.
So if you have ACG's then it can predict
that after this comes an a for example.
So this is a basically how the inference
step works for both the forward function
right here and then for the generation
function. For the embedding specifically
what you do is just run this scoring
function and then instead of using the
logic output you just take out the
embeddings. So this really isn't
something for itself. This is just a
part of the scoring function up here.
Good. So, hopping down, we can take a
look at how the loss function has been
described in the report and then how it
works um and how they define it to be as
optimal as possible for the training
phase. So, during training, when a model
makes a prediction, a loss function
determines how wrong that model's
prediction were and then an optimizer
changes the weights and biases to
hopefully make it a little bit more
correct next time. So this is the
fundamental cycle of a supervised
machine learning training and the
specific loss function can then be
defined to punish the model more or less
for certain behavior. So first of all
you need a way to measure how wrong your
model's predictions are when training
it. So the measurement of wrongness is
called the loss and that is what the
loss functions function calculates. So
EVO 2 uses cross entropy and that is
just the standard for tasks predicting
probabilities of different options. So
the probability of either the next
sequence next token being an A, T, G or
C. But they do modify this cross entropy
loss function a little bit though and
the reason is that the DNA DNA sequence
can be divided into two different parts.
The first part is the region that
contains the unique parts that code for
that gene and then there's also
repetitive regions such as intron as we
talked about earlier that are non-coding
for genes. So these parts of the DNA
sequence doesn't matter as much as these
parts that actually does code for the
genes such as exxons. So what this means
is that if the model messes up and
predicts a wrong agn so a token in a
part that doesn't code for a gene so
within an intron for example it doesn't
matter as much as if the model predicts
a wrong token in the part that is
important for coding of the gene. So if
the model predicts a wrong token in an
exxon it is pretty bad because that
actually codes for the gene. if it
breaks the wrong token in the intron, it
doesn't really matter because that
doesn't code for the gene anyways. So
these two cases can be taken account for
by changing the loss function a little
bit. So in the report they define the
loss function as the following. So first
there is the loss score that is the
variable you see over here to the left
and the loss score is just a number that
defines how wrong the model was in this
prediction. The loss score is calculated
from the sum of all losses and the sum
is taken by with the large sigma symbol.
So that is what you see right here and
the large sigma summarizes this uh
statement right here across all
different losses ran through this loss
function and this uh and each of these
evaluate to the loss of the single
position or single prediction and then
we multiply a weight onto that. So this
is just the loss. So if we just remove
the weight right here for example then
the loss would just be the same
regardless of whether you're in a
repetitive region or not. But then by
multiplying this weight onto it, you can
punish the model less hard if you are in
a repetitive region than in than if you
are not in a repetitive region. So the
weight is determined uh if you are in a
repetitive region or not. So if you're
in a repetitive region, it'll be 0.1. So
this means you will punish the model 10
times less hard if you are in a
repetitive region. Otherwise, you'll
just punish the model as normal. And
then this is being summarized and then
the average of that has been taken. So
over here each loss so the loss of CE is
the loss with the weight multiplied onto
it and then the weight is then
determined by whether you are in a
repetitive region or not. So as I write
right here it is it comes down to if the
loss is reweight the loss is reweight
such that a wrong prediction in a
repetitive region is only 10% as wrong
as a wrong prediction in a coding
region. So let's take a look at what
made the researchers actually do this
and they describe a little bit about the
thought process behind this in the
report. So the reason they wanted to do
this was to encourage the model to learn
unique parts of genomes instead of just
simple repetitive parts such as seen in
the intron for example. So the right
here this loss has been found in other
DNA models to improve performance on
downstream tasks and better calibrate
likelihoods between repetitive and
non-repetitive DNA. So it made the model
perform better which is great. But now
you might question how do you determine
whether you're inside a repetitive
region or not? So how does determined
whether a region is repetitive or not
right now? So this method for
determining this wasn't actually
described in in the research report but
it seems that it was annotated in a
pre-processing step and this I get from
the following lines. So this affects the
genomic window and whole genome portions
of the data which contains these
annotations. So they describe how they
rewway this cross entropy loss and then
they describe the annotations
annotations right after. So it seems
like they have annotated whether you're
in a in a repetitive region or not uh in
the training data. And they also
describe down here for the first three
trillion tokens of pre-training.
Lowerase tokens are input to the model
uh to add information on which portions
of DNA are repetitive. So this is just
their way of annotating whether you're
in a repetitive region or not. So this
was just a little bit about the loss
function that was used which is a pretty
cool insight into how the model works
and some of the thoughts the researchers
have done while building out the EVO 2
model. The researchers also described
the hyperparameters used for both the 7
billion parameter model and also the 40
billion parameter model. And then they
describe a pretty interesting fact which
is how they scaled the model up from the
8,000 nucleotide context window and all
the way up to the 1 million nucleotide
context window. Because you don't just
take the model that is 8,000 nucleotides
or train for that and then suddenly put
pass in a million nucleotides. You scale
it up slowly and gradually until you
have the desired context when you window
you need. So down here pre-training
allowed the model to understand the
basic DNA grammar. And since real
genomes are much longer than the 8,000
nucleotide context, they gradually
adapted the model to be able to process
the amount of DNA that could be that
should be able to be processed at once.
So each one of these rows is a different
phase in the gradual scaling from the
8,000 nucleotide window and all the way
up to 1 million nucleotide window up
here. So you can see how they divided
the different uh tokens. So 50 billion
tokens per phase into these different
phases and then scaled it all the way up
to the 1 million context length window.
And apart from this they also mention a
base frequency along with a scale
factor. And these we'll cover in just a
second down here. So down here in the
report they mention we explore two
different rotary embedding based methods
to adapt to longer sequences. Positional
interpolation by scaling down the
positional index index of tokens and
increasing the base frequency of the
rope embedding. They then decide on a
combined approach using both together
with a 10x increase to the base
frequency for every doubling of context
length. And this table for up here then
describes the parameters for these
methods that they used. So this might
sound a little bit like gibberish. It at
least it at least did to me first time I
read it. So I looked into what rope is
so I can try and explain it to you as
well. So first what is even rope? So
rope is an abbrevation for rotary
positional embedding and it all boils
down to the model needing to be able to
understand order. So the sequence ATGC
is different from the sequence tcga. So
if you give the model a sequence, it
needs to be able to understand the
position of each DNA base and thereby
keep the order. So it has to know that
this order is different from this order
for example. So the first solution would
to be just number the positions right
here. So for example, if you have 1 2 3
4 and 5 and six, these would then just
be different numbers for the different
positions. So this would be 1 2 3 4 etc.
So these symbols over here, the square,
circle, x, star, etc. represent the
actual data tokens. So the specific
nucleotides ATGC that exist at each
numbered position in the sequence. So
position one contains a square and this
would then be an A. So why use these
symbols instead of ATGC? Well, the
problem is that a model can't really
learn what an A is, but it uses abstract
symbols such as these, this is just an
analogy to represent what an A actually
is. So these are just codes just like
the model would use codes within its
internal states to represent these
different ATGs and C's. So in this
example, the model would learn a code
for position one. It would learn another
code for position two, etc. And it
doesn't automatically learn from these
position codes that for example five and
six are neighbors or that four comes
before five. It just has to figure this
out by seeing a lot of sequences which
isn't very efficient or effective
especially not for long sequences. So
the first problem is that the model
doesn't know that position five and
position 6 are closer to each other than
position five and position 1,00 because
there isn't any inbuilt relationship
between these different positions. So
the model learns a unique code for each
position number that it sees. But
there's no built-in mathematical code
that says that a star is related to a
triangle. So the model also doesn't know
that the star comes before the triangle
and therefore has to learn this from
scratch. So let's say you train a model
with maybe a context window of 10
tokens. This means that the model would
learn 10 different positions inside its
internal states. But then if you run
inference with the model afterwards and
you give it six tokens input for
example, then it hasn't really learned
that a sixth position even exists. So it
won't be able to handle this properly.
So that is the problem with solution num
solution one which is numbering
positions. And this brings us to the
second solution which was what was used
in the report and that is with rope. So
rotational embeddings. So instead of
these absolute positions up here, you
can then encode the positions and also
how they relate to each other with
rotations. So up here we don't encode
how they relate to each other, just the
positions. But with these rotations down
here, which is another representation,
what they try to do is just also encode
how they do relate to each other. So
with this rope method, each position
gets a rotation by a specific angle m.
So each one of these arrows is a vector.
So and this a would be a vector for
example. And then the t right after
would also be a vector. The g would also
be a vector and the z would also be a
vector. And their position in the
sequence is marked by their specific
angle. So this one would be a specific
uh position. This one is another
position and this one is another
position. So the angle of this vector
can be calculated from the position. And
then you multiply that by by an angle.
So a specific angle like M. And this is
an angle you define yourself. So let's
say you have position one and you have
position two. Well, because position two
is twice as large as position one. Then
the angle would be twice as much because
of this uh equation right here. And the
relation and the relationship between
the different arrows will then just be
the difference between the angles right
here. So going down, how does it store
positional data? Well, the position is
stored as the direction of the arrow.
the the direction of the angle. So this
just means where it points and your
relative distance between the different
positions are then stores stored as the
angle difference between the rotations
of each arrow. So this is just the angle
difference you see with red right here.
So to give an example, if the first base
has a 10° rotation and the second base
has a 20° rotation, the difference is
going to be actually 10°. If you do
rotate both um both arrows by 90
degrees, their relative difference will
still be 10° because there will still be
an angle difference between these even
if you do rotate them around the axis.
And because there are only 360° around
in a circle, they'll just keep wrapping
around the axis and you'll never run out
of positions. So unlike unlike the
simple numbering up here, using this
method inherently encodes relative
distances. The model doesn't have to
learn from scratch that five and six up
here, for example, are neighbors. The
small angle difference between their
rotations tell us that directly. So a
relationship between position 5 and 6
would be encoded the same way as the
relationship between a position 1,05 and
1,06. So the reason that they wanted to
use this method is that this is very
useful for extending the context length
as we saw up here. So these base
frequencies are actually the m angles
down here that we can multiply with. So
the model can apply the same logic of
comparing the angle differences even to
positions far beyond what it saw in the
initial training. So this makes it way
better at handling longer sequences. So
with that in mind, let's just talk about
extrapolation. So the rope method
handles position outside it its original
training data somewhat naturally. So
because the position is encoded into so
the position right here is encoded into
the rotation angle as the position gets
very large. So above 360° 360° it just
wraps around the circle like you see
right here. So you see position 1 2 3
but then position 10 is obviously way
larger. So that might wrap around a full
uh 360° and then even further all the
way up until here. So it just wraps
around this axis. So the model can still
just calculate the relative angle
differences. So the problem the
researchers were trying to solve was
they wanted to be able to extend the
context length of the model after
already having trained it for
pre-training. So again if we go back
they explored two different rotary
embedding based methods to adapt to
longer sequences. The first one was
positional interpolation by scaling down
the positional index of tokens. The
second one was increasing the base
frequency. So let's talk about
increasing the base frequency first. So
there is a little problem when extending
the context length. So when extending
the contact length from 8,000
nucleotides to 1 million, that is a
contact length growth of 125x. This
means that the same position line has to
fit in 125x as many positions. So the
difference between the positions will
also be 125x smaller. And this makes it
harder for the model to recognize the
difference between the positions. And
therefore you can adjust the bass
frequency up so the model again knows
where the bass is again. So going all
the way up here, we can see this is
exactly what they did. They scale the
bass frequency up by a factor of 10
every time they up the context length as
well. So you might think, why wouldn't
they just take the base frequency of
this massive context length right here
and just use that both for pre-training
and then all the way up through all the
different phases. So the reason for that
is that the 1 million token base angle
isn't used or sorry isn't also used
during the AK pre-training because the
difference between positions would be
massive. So remember this base frequency
is what we multiply onto let me just
find the formula is what we multiply
onto the position. So let's say we have
a very small context window but a
massive bass frequency. Well in that
case it would wrap around a lot of times
before even reaching some of these first
positions. So prevent to prevent this
wrapping around going crazy because you
have that big of a bass angle, you
should scale up the bass frequency as
well when you scale up the context
window. So let's say the bass frequency
is super large because you just used a
massive bass frequency for the aka
context window. Well, in that case, it
might wrap around a couple thousand°
even for position one. So this would
make the relative distance quite
confusing for the model because it is
simply such large numbers all of a
sudden. So that is why they increased
the base frequency. They also talked
about increasing sorry they talked about
positional interpolation by scaling down
the positional index of tokens. So let's
just talk about what they did down here.
Well, if the model has a context window
of 1,024, so if it's trained on these
positions 0 to 1,024, but it now needs
to adapt to a double as or twice as
large of a context window.
So48. Well, now the model has to be able
to handle twice as many positions. So
within this range right here, there will
be twice as many positions. If you use
the full context window, that is now
twice as large. So because the model was
trained for
1,024, these new8 positions can be
scaled down by 0.5. So because you
double the amount of positions, so you
scale down the positions by a half to
what it has been trained on. And then
the unseen positions can then be
interpolated. So let's see, let's say
the model has seen these four positions
and that is what it was initially
trained on. But now we want to increase
it to more positions. Well, then we can
interpolate the new positions by putting
in new arrows between these arrows
arrows. So the model basically just
needs to interpolate to find out what
between what is between these these
arrows. So that is just that is pretty
much possible because we have the
formula. We just put in the position and
then also the base angle and this way
the model can interpolate the new
positions that is between the old
positions and thereby extend to a longer
context window. So to summarize down
here the positional interpolation maps
the new position range to the old one
that the model has learned. So that was
the first approach they used up here.
And then the base frequency scaling
adjusts the rate at which the angles
change within that map range. So by
preventing the angles from wrapping
around 360° too quickly, it maintains a
unique rotational value for positions
that are much further apart. So these
are the two approaches the researchers
used and uh they use a mix of both.
Great. So this gave you an insight into
how the training was done with the
model. So with that out the way, now we
can go ahead and take a look at how we
can actually use the model over here. So
EVO 2 is a model for genome modeling and
design across all domains of life as
they wrote right here in the GitHub
repository. Um, so how what features
does it actually have and how can we use
the model? Well, first of all, it was
trained on 9.3 trillion base pairs. So a
lot of data and it has a context window
of 1 million tokens. So we had a lot so
we have a lot to work with here and it
also knows DNA from many species and not
just human species as we covered. So the
first use case we're going to talk about
is going to be generative tasks. So
fundamentally EVO 2 is a generative
model and this means that we can use it
to generate DNA sequences. So if you
give it an input which is a sequence of
HD GS and C's. So nucleotides it will be
able to predict the next nucleotides in
the sequence appending to the sequence
and then return that. That is also what
we saw over here in the documentation
under generation where it is inputed a
sequence of nucleotides and then it
returns the finished sequence with more
appended nucleotides to this
sequence. So the model is able to
generate sequences matching what is
found in nature. So up here, if you give
it an input sequence and have it
generate an output sequence, there isn't
really any purpose to this generated
sequence though. So down here, we can
take a look at how the researchers
tested a gen tested its generated
capabilities and then use something
called guided generation to help the
researchers generate a sequence that
they actually wanted. So let's just take
a look at this excerpt from the report.
So they say we found that EVO 2 can
generate mitochondrial genomes with the
correct number of coding sequences tRNA
RNA genes when annotated with mitoset.
So why mitochondria? Well, they are
pretty small organisms and they can also
easily be analyzed. So a blast P
analysis revealed that EVO 2 created
diverse mitochondrial genes with varying
degrees of sequence identity to natural
mitochondrial proteins. So they found
that EVO 2 can create mitochondrial
genes that looks like how they do in in
real life. And then they say notably
individual genes showed the highest
homology to different organisms ranging
from fish to mammals. So I wrote here
the model doesn't only generate genomes
most similar to humans but because it
was trained in all these different
organisms it is able to generate diverse
outputs while still sticking to
biological characteristics. The
researchers then say the generated
sequences also maintain proper synonyy.
So what does ciny even mean? Well, in
mitochondria sorry in the mitochondria
generated different genes appeared in
the same relative order as in human
mitochondrial genomes. So this shows
that the model knows how to generate
content of these sequences in the
correct order too and that is what they
mean by proper syony. They additionally
also write while exhibiting considerable
sequence diversification when compared
to native sequences. So what they mean
by this is that the model is able to
generate sequences in the correct order
but still sequences that are diverse
enough that this isn't just copying the
native sequences. Lastly, they say using
alpha 3 for protein multimo prediction,
we found that the generated sequences
form structures matching output or sorry
expected mitochondrial protein complex
folds and interactions. So when taking
amino acids from generated DNA and
folding it, it will match the existing
protein structures from naturally
occurring mitochondrial protein in real
life and they actually put in a diagram
down here of how much they look and
match. So in real life protein folds. So
a protein as we talked about earlier
consists of amino acids and the the
sequence of these amino acids primarily
determine how the protein actually
folds. So if the order of amino acids is
the same in the generated sequence kind
of as it is in the real life sequences
the protein should fold in the same way.
So for this diagram in the report we
first of all see the annotation right
here. So this is the name of the
mythicondrial protein gene. The sequence
ID percentage down here is how similar
the EVO 2 generated protein sequence is
to the closest real protein found in a
database. So obviously the higher this
is the more accurate it is when you
compare it to existing proteins in the
database. And what what they want to
show with this diagram right here is
that EVO2 generated proteins are clearly
super related to the real method
proteins since they are this alike with
these high percentages. So the overall
meaning of this diagram is that the EVO
2 generated DNA sequences doesn't
actually just look like genes but they
actually code for these proteins that
when folded with AI for example is
predicted to have the correct 3D
structures that also assemble correctly
together in these larger complexes as
seen in real life as well. So it kind of
suggests that EVO 2 has learned some
deeper functional patterns and
constraints um just beyond the sequence
patterns that actually allows us to
create these larger protein complex when
folded. So hopping down here there is
another diagram from the report as well.
So in this diagram we see two different
plots one for each model. There are the
7 billion parameter model and the 40
billion parameter model. So in here each
dot represents one protein sequence
generated by EVO 2. They then looked
through a database online or something
to find the most similar matches to
those proteins. So they used the
generation feature up here to generate
sequences that would produce proteins
and then they would match those proteins
generated with actual real proteins from
databases. So on the y-axis over here
this means how much of the generated
proteins length matched up with the real
protein. So that is the query cover over
here between zero and 100%. So how this
works is that you take the sequence that
has been generated by EVO 2 that
produces this protein and then you do
what is called a blast search. So you
use the protein sequence as the search
query for the database and the database
then returns the best hit for what
matches that protein sequence or sorry
DNA sequence the most. So the y-axis
over here so the query cover means what
percentage of the total length of the
EVO2 generated protein. So the query
that was included in the alignment
region with the best real protein match
found. So for example, if an evil 2
protein was 100 amino acids long, the
best alignment covered 80% of these
amino acids. So this would mean that the
query cover would then be 80%. And then
for the y-axis down or sorry the x-axis
down here, the sequence identity, this
is how well or how similar the generated
protein is to the closest real match. So
where the y-axis says that maybe 80% of
the generated protein is able to be
aligned with the best m best match from
the database. Well, those 80%s over here
down on the x- axis, well, how how
similar are they actually to the real
database sequence? Because just because
they align doesn't means doesn't mean
that they're 100% equal. So, if there
are some mutations between the generated
sequence with EV 2 and then the
reference sequence from the database,
well, that is then what this sequence
identity x-axis label means. And one
thing to consider as well is that it
isn't a bad thing that the dots aren't
at 100% match because that could just
indicate model overfitting. So that the
model has just been memorizing the
sequences that is from the training data
and then it's just replicating those
existing sequences because the model can
instead generate biological plausible
sequences. So the goal isn't exactly to
cover the genomes um onetoone but to
understand the rules of the genomes and
then generate new so novel sequences but
still plausibly. So instead of just
remembering the sequences from the
training data, it is able to learn the
syntax of the sequences and then
generate new sequences from that. So
that might also be the reason that they
aren't at exactly 100% for all of these
proteins generated. So let's hop down to
the next part. This is called generate
or guided generation. So this is about
designing genomes for specific goals. So
up here, as I talked about just a few
minutes ago, you give it an input and
then it predicts the next outputs that
are most likely to be syntactically
correct. But if you want to design
sequences that have specific purposes,
that is what you can do with guided
generation. So you want to design
genomes for specific goals. One of these
goals could be chromatin accessibility.
So to give you a little background about
what this chromatin accessibility is
before actually designing for it down
here, we can take a look at this
explanation. So first of all, the DNA
strings are really long, but they still
need to be fit within a single cell. So
since the DNA for the entire genome has
to be stored within all the different
cells, they need to be packed in a very
tight and compact way to fit within
those cells. So the cells need to pack
the DNA very efficiently. So instead of
just stuffing it randomly, they have to
pack it very efficiently and nicely. So
the DNA is wound around small proteins
called histones spools. And these spools
are then wound and then packed tightly
into complexes called chromatines. So
over here in this image from Wikipedia,
you see the DNA being round around
histones. So the histones are the big
green balls and these are then packed
even more complex more compact into
these complexes down here called
chromatins. But when you pack it this
tightly, the problem is that if the
genes within the DNA is packed so
tightly, it might be inaccessible for
being read. And if you can't even read
the DNA, why even have it there to begin
with? So the solution for this problem
is that the cells unpack or sorry the
cell unpacks only the chromatin
structure around the needed gene. So
this will then make that gene
accessible. So to hop back to the
chromatin accessibility definition.
Well, this means that how physically
open and reachable this gene is within
its packaged uh chromatin. So why is
this chromatin accessibility important?
Well, every cell stores the full genome,
but cells in the brain one need the same
genes as cells in the skin for example.
So for example, a cell in the brain
keeps brain genes easily accessible
while packing the skin teens skin genes
tightly away. So DNA can be designed so
certain chromatines are more or less
accessible depending on where you are in
the body. So what the researchers then
tried to do here is to guide this
chromatin accessibility to regulate to
regulate how genes are expressed um in
the DNA. So they call this generative
epigenomics with inference time search.
So epigenomics is the study of how
chemical changes to the DNA and the
associated proteins affect how the genes
are turned on and off without altering
the DNA sequence itself. So expressing
certain genes more or less for example
without actually removing the genes. So
in the report they write ukarotic
genomes regulate gene expression through
a complex system of chemical and protein
mediate modifications referred to as the
epiggenome. And then they say an
important component of the epigenomic
regulation involves modifying the
openness and compactness of chromatin
which in turn controls which DNA regions
can be accessed via trans
transcriptional machinery. So in this
diagram from the report on the y-axis
they have a a metric for how open the
chromatin is so how accessible it is and
on the x-axis they have some metric for
the location in the sequence for
example. So the black boxes is where
they wanted the chromatins to be open
and the blue p peaks are how open the
DNA sequences turned out to be in those
locations. And as you see from the
diagram, it turns out that they were
able to make the chromatin very
accessible in these specific places that
it wanted it to be while keeping it
inaccessible in the places they didn't
want it to be accessible. So they could
design for chromatin accessibility
within a specific pattern which is
basically the idea behind the guided
generation. And in the report they
write, "We therefore aim to develop an
approach that uses EVO2 to generate DNA
sequences for which we can specify both
the location and the length of chromatin
accessible regions. So that is what they
did up here by specifying the locations
and also the width of how these regions
of chromatin accessibility should look.
So when hopping up here to the
generation example where you just give
it an input sequence then you receive
some output where it has appended some
tokens to the input sequence. It might
not be very obvious how they were able
to actually generate the guidance
because it doesn't look like from the
GitHub as well that they can actually
give it a prompt that it has to generate
certain chrom chromatin accessibility
features in certain locations because
that isn't really a feature of the
model. So how they fixed this problem
was by using other AI models as well and
then coupling these. So there is two
different components to being able to do
this feature. One is the EVO2 model and
another component is these two AI models
which they used in in addition to the
EVO 2 model. So we have two we have two
AI models inform and BSO and these are
AI models that can predict chromatin
accessibility profiles from DNA
sequences but they can't generate the
sequences themselves. The EVO2 model is
the second component to this process.
This EV2 model can generate sequences,
but it can't apply conditions to these
generations like I just told you. So
they won't be able to predict chromatin
accessibility profile, for example, and
apply these constraints, but it will
only be able to generate the sequences.
So you can combine these two components
and thereby generate a sequence and then
check whether the generated sequence
matches the desired output and then
reject or accept these generated
sequences based on whether they fit into
the constraints set by the inform and
bot and bossy AI models. So how do you
do this in a in real life then? So there
are two components to this process as I
said before. First you have the EVO 2
model and then and then they have four
different examples right here giving it
the same input sequence. And because you
can change the seed for example or have
it generate different output sequences
based on the same input sequence because
it's a large language model. You can
then take these output sequences run it
through the informer and balsa AI models
and then they these two AI models will
then predict whether the chromatin is
accessible within the desired region and
then accept whether to use this output
sequence or not based on the output of
these two models. So as you see in the
first example right here, the first row
you gave you or sorry the researchers
gave the model an input sequence. It
then generated an output sequence and
then this output sequence then just
happened to have a chromatin
accessibility feature that matched with
what the researchers desired. So
therefore they accept this output
sequence right here. If you then take
the next output sequence that was
generated from the same input sequence,
it then didn't match a or it then didn't
predict a chromatin accessibility
accessibility feature matching what the
researchers desired. So they rejected
this output sequence. And they can then
do this for the different output
sequences generated by the EVO2 model.
And this way you can guide the
generation by rejecting or accepting
different output sequences that matches
the certain constraints that you have
set before the generation process even
begins. So this diagram right here or at
least the same process is also described
in the report. So the researchers say we
use autogressive generation with EVO 2
to sample multiple 120 base pair chunks
of DNA given the same genetic prompt. So
they give the model the same genetic
prompt but you get different output
sequences and these output sequences
will then be 128 nucleotides long. After
doing the after doing this they then or
sorry they say we then use the informer
and boss so to predict how these chunks
affect the chromatin accessibility
profile of the generated sequence and
score these profiles based on how well
they match the desired peak patterns. So
again the black boxes right here is the
desired pattern is the desired patterns
and the blue patterns and the blue boxes
you see right under is how the inform
and balsoy algorithms or AI models
actually predict that the generated
sequence match these desired patterns.
So this is basically the score. So this
score would be pretty good because it
matches the blackbox very well and this
score would be very poor because it
doesn't doesn't match the black box very
well. Then the researchers say chunks
that have the most desirable
accessibility profiles are retained by
appending to the prompt and generation
proceeds to the next step using a beam
search algorithm to keep track of the
best generated sequences. So to break it
down even more to just follow a step by
step they give the model a sequence. So
the sequence oh this sequence right here
TC a gta. They then generate 128 base
pairs. Then they score the 128 B 28 base
pairs through another model to see if
they fit the criteria set up from the
start. If they fit the criteria and the
constraints, they then add these this
output sequence to the existing sequence
and generate 128 base pairs more. If
not, they regenerate the sequence and
see if that fits even better. So that is
how you can do decide guided generation
with the EVO 2 model by using other AI
models that can predict whether
constraints are followed or not. The
next feature apart from generation is
predicting is prediction tasks. So
hopping over here we can take a look at
scoring. So just using the normal
forward where you can score likelihoods
across the DNA sequence. We have all al
already talked about this pretty
extensively. So this is just for
spotting mutations in DNA for example.
So a small example right here is that
just like some AI models can spot spam
mails in your inbox, this can spot
harmful mutations. And we have actually
already talked pretty extensively about
this up here with the mutation analysis
where we talked about how this mutation
analysis was used to validate that the
model has actually learned about start
code on. So with these prediction tasks
already pretty extensively covered, we
can go ahead and just hop down to
embeddings which is the next feature. We
covered embeddings pretty briefly but I
would like to go more in depth with what
it is and what it can be used for. So
embeddings is the is this third feature.
So vectors that EVO 2 generates as part
of processing DNA are what we refer to
when we say embeddings. So hidden layers
compress information down to numbers/
vectors and these can then be used to
train other models. So in the example we
used before as well is that EVO 2 might
be able to capture more accurate
features in its embeddings than other
models are. Therefore, models using
EVO2's embeddings will be more precise
because these models can then leverage
um EVO 2's internal representation of
these inputs and then use these
representation as inputs for these new
models. So, EVO 2 embeddings for example
would reflect knowledge about codons
more than raw data would in itself. So,
just to summarize what an embedding is
quickly, if we have a neural network
here, we have some input neurons, we
have some output neurons and we have the
hidden layers. So, we know what the
input uh what the input neurons or what
the input data will look like. And we'll
also know what the output data will look
like, but inside these hidden layers
right here, this will just be numbers
that won't really make much sense to us
as humans because they'll just be
numbers generated from weights and
biases. So, the embeddings in this case
would then just be an entire layer's
output. So if you just take the output
of numbers from this entire hidden
layers or from this entire hidden layer
which doesn't really make much sense to
us as a human we can then take all these
numbers and then use these numbers or
these neurons outputs as an input for a
new neural network which would then
train. So that is the basic idea behind
embeddings. So as explained earlier you
define your sequence and tokenize that.
You then define the layer you would like
to extract the embeddings from. So this
layer would have a name for example and
that is what they have done down here.
they've described the layer to grab the
output from. So blocks.28.MLP
etc. Then they just run a forward with
the EVO 2 model and then grab the
embeddings like this. So let's just go
through an example of how this is used.
So let's say we would like to train a
model to predict if a genetic variant
increases cancer risk. So for the
training data, we'll need two different
things. First, we'll need a nonmutated
version of the gene. So we'll need the
base pairs for a gene related to that
cancer in a reference genome. And this
reference genome should then therefore
also be nonmutated. And then for a
training sample, we can then take the
blood sample from a person with a
specific type of cancer related to this
gene. So we sequence the DNA from that
sample, find the base pairs for the
cancer related to the gene, and then
this will then contain the variant
compared to the reference gene. So this
up here is a sequence of how is this
gene actually supposed to look with
these nucleotides. This down here is a
person with cancer where you take a
where you measure the actual nucleotide
sequence and then find out how those
nucleotides nucleotides differ from how
it is supposed to look. And this way you
can see maybe which nucleotide mutations
cause this cancer up here. And with
enough of these samples you might be
able to train a model to detect whether
a person have cancer or not. So with
this data right here we can go ahead and
instruct and extract the features from
the EVO 2 model. So step one is you run
uh you run the reference gene through
EVO 2 and extract the embeddings um at
layer and then blocks 28 MLP L3 or
whatever they write they wrote right
here or just the layer that that you
find works the best. Secondly you do the
same just for the sample gene. So you do
you attract the embeddings from the
reference and then also for the sample
of the person with cancer. So in this
case now the embeddings has been
extracted from EVO 2 and EVO 2's
knowledge can now be leveraged with this
training data. now pre-processed as
well. We can go ahead and train the
model. So the features for this AI model
or the inputs would be the reference
embedding and also the sample
embeddings. So these two right here and
the label or the output of the model
would then be a true or false flag about
whether the variant is pathogenic or
not. So in real life this would be some
kind of score between zero and one. So
between 0 and 100% and if it's one then
it's pathogenic. If it's zero then it's
non- pathogenic. So when training the
model, this would obviously be one for
the training data because the person has
cancer. And if you give it a sample
embedding where the person does not have
cancer, this would then just be zero. So
the alternative to using these
embeddings would to be put in the actual
sequences itself as raw inputs. So right
here and then you would give the
reference sequence and then the sequence
with the person who was from the person
who was cancer. So maybe there's a
mutation right here. And the model
itself would then have to learn that
this is a mutation, what a mutation is,
and whether this is syntactically
correct or not correct, and also how how
dangerous this even is. So this is all
something that EVO 2 has most likely
learned and can then be leveraged by
extracting these embeddings right here.
So the benefit of using these embeddings
is that since EVO 2 has been trained on
DNA, its embeddings will be richer and
more informative. Those are the keywords
than just using the raw base pairs as I
explained right here as the model
inputs. So there's there is really so
many use cases for using EVO 2 to build
other AI models as well for example. So
it's really powerful to have models out
and open source like this. So there is a
lot of opportunity for building cool
stuff with with EVO 2 and also the
things that derive from EVO 2. Now with
the basic theory about EVO 2, what it
can do and how it works down, we can go
ahead and take a look at how we can
actually work with this in on the code
side. So on the tech side. Now, running
these large language models over here
requires a lot of GPU memory. So, you'll
have to use some pretty hefty graphics
cards. So, we'll use serverless GPUs for
this video. And for the previous SAS
products I have built, I've always
almost gone with serverless solutions
just because they are partly cheaper.
And also, the developer experience is
much nicer versus something like a cloud
platforms. So, just normal Azure or AWS.
So, I reached out to Modal actually to
see if they would sponsor this video.
And the reason is that modal has a great
developer experience and also a very
generous free tier. So if you hop into
modal and then AI, you should be able to
find model right here and then just see
their pricing. So you have about $30
worth of free credits every month. And
then their most expensive credit
graphics card right here is about $4 per
hour. So you have a full hour of
runtime. And remember this is
serverless. So you really probably
shouldn't run out of this from building
this video. So this means you can do the
entire video without paying anything
basically and still running some of the
most powerful graphic graphics cards in
the world. So that is what we're going
with for this video. So you usually have
two approaches when working with these
GPUs. The traditional approach approach
is using AWS for example where you use
something like an EC2 instance. This is
a great approach if you want it to be
always warm but you'll also then have to
pay for all the uptime that you need for
your serverless or for your GPU. And
this can get quite expensive if you
don't use it constantly. So for a
traditional approach like EC2, you'll
need to pay per hour of instance uptime
until terminated. You'll need to build
the dog image locally as well, push to
ECR, and then pull down to EC2. You'll
need to start the instance, install
packages when started, and also shut
them down. And then there's also no GPU
instance free tier. So if you hop into
AWS, for example, and then I think it's
called P5, their instances. These are
the instances that have a H100 graphics
cards. So, they have H100 and the
smallest one you can get has eight H100s
and it's about $96 per hour as far as I
know, which is crazily expensive. If you
go into model instead, you can get one
one H100 for only $4 an hour and you get
it for free because you won't really use
all that within a month anyways. So,
it's really a no-brainer to use a model
compared to AWS in this video because
we'll need a very huge graphic card to
be able to run this model. So AWS does
have Lambda, but that is only for
serverless CPUs, but for AI, we actually
are going to need the GPUs. So we can't
really use AWS Lambda. So the usual
workflow you also you also use with AWS
is that you write some code. So you code
the program, then you build a Docker
image locally, then you push that Docker
image to ECR that stores the Docker
images. Then you can take an EC2
instance, pull that Docker image down to
the EC2 instance. and then from your
computer you can then say okay now we
start up the C2 instance and then
configure it and then run the dog image.
So there is significant overhead with
the development process in itself. So
when I say that the developer experience
is very nice on some of these serverless
GPU platforms like modal this is what I
mean. So going down to a platform like
model that is serverless you get access
to GPU serverless. So you don't have to
pay for every hour of uptime. So you
only pay per use. So this also means
that everyone can follow along for free
in the video which is huge for me. And
then a dog container is automatically
built by modal when you push. You can
then just pick different GPUs by
switching out a string in the code
instead of having to start up a new EC2
instance if you want to switch out the
GPU. Then you have to configure all this
again. So start up and configure the
instances and this is just a huge mess
and it takes a lot of time and it's a
lot of overhead. So you can then pick
between different GPUs by switching and
throwing in the code as I said. So the
local development experience is very
nice because you can just run a single
command do modal run and then it'll run
in the cloud without you having to push
it to a dog container and then do it in
the cloud. So deployment is also a
single command. So up here instead of
having to code the program build the
docker image push it to ECR and then
download it to EC2 you code the program
then you say modal run. The code is then
pushed to modal automatically instead of
you having to push a Docker image. Model
then automatically builds the docker
image and then runs your program with
GPUs in the cloud. So all of these steps
which are massive overhead are then
completely avoided with modal which
makes the developer experience much
better in my opinion. And then when the
program has been run the output is just
returned back to your local machine and
also stored on the model website. So as
I wrote down here having to not upload
the docker container every time is a
massive timesaver and makes the
developer experience so much nicer. And
you'll see how much nicer it's going to
be in this video when we actually do go
ahead and run with modal. So we can
start with the repository Evo 2 by going
ahead and cloning it down. And then they
have a notebook about BRCA, so a
specific gene for cancer. And then we
can try and work with their notebook and
just see how it works. After looking at
their notebook, we'll just try and run
this example on modal as well. So in the
cloud and then we'll go ahead and build
out our program from the knowledge we
have learned from this notebook. So I'll
just start by opening up Visual Studio
Code right here and then hopping under
file and then open folder. Then I'll hop
into my documents repositories and then
in here I'll create a new folder and
call this variant analysis and then EVO
2. I'll then say create. In here I'll
just create a new folder called
backend and just say create and then
I'll open that up. Great. in here. I'll
just go ahead and first of all create a
new terminal and then we can hop all the
way back to EVO 2, the repository. If
you haven't had it open, it's under Arc
Institute Evo 2. What you can then do is
scroll down and then find the following
command get clone d-recurse submodules
and paste it into your terminal. You'll
then just put in a single space and then
we'll hop up to code and then just copy
to clipboard. Paste it in and then press
enter. This will clone the repository
down along with all the repositories
inside of it. So you see how it
references to another repository right
here called vortex which we talked about
earlier as well. This is another repo
and that will need to be cloned down as
well. And as far as I know vortex also
contains other other repositories in
itself. So cut for example and
transformer engine. So all of these will
will be recursively cloned down to your
computer. So you can actually go ahead
and and see what what is inside of it.
So right now it cloned down EVO 2. So
you can see the EVO 2 folder and you can
also see all the code and the vortex
folder is also populated. So it cloned
it successfully. Now I'll just go ahead
and say shift command and P create a new
Python environment VNV. I'll use Python
3.12.3 and then just take all of these
and just say okay. This will then create
a new Python environment and install all
the packages from the requirements files
like this in all the recursive module as
well. Now while this is while this is
installing I can just go ahead and go
and search for Python. So if you wasn't
able to see Python under create the
create Python environment menu right
here you should be able to just go ahead
and install Python. So under EVO 2 they
do say that you need Python 3.11 or
more. So, I'll just roll with Python
3.12. You can go ahead and test other
Python versions if you want, but I'll
just use 3.12 because it has worked for
me. So, go ahead and download that if
you wasn't able to see your Python
version. And then if you wasn't able
to replicate this create environment
menu right here, you might need to
install some of the extensions I have as
well. So, I use autopip 8, I use,
pyance, python, python debugger, and
then tensorboard. These are the ones I
have installed for Python specifically.
Great. So now our environment should
have been created along with the
requirements uh installed from
requirements.txt right here. So under
the venv you should be able to see all
the libraries that was installed. So
those should be successfully installed
now at least. That is great. Good. So
one thing you need to notice is that we
won't really be able to run this entire
model on our own computer. We'll need to
run it um in the cloud. So that is also
why we'll use modal specifically because
it lets us run this in the cloud so
easily. So the reason you we can see
this is because on the requirements it
says evil 2 is based on stripe 2 which
requires python 3.11 and it also uses
the transformer
engine.8 for some layers which requires
an h100. So this is this massive
graphics card which is hugely expensive
as well. So we won't be able to run this
locally unless you have an H1 H100 which
you probably do not. So we'll actually
need to run this with modal anytime we
want to test some of the code in here
just because it has such high
requirements for our hardware. Great. So
before actually running the code, let's
just go ahead and check out one of their
notebooks which is an example of how
they actually use EVO2 in real life. So
in this notebook right here, BCA1, what
they do is the example I talked to you
about right here. So using this BCA
cancer data set. Great. So in here they
run through with text and explanations
how you can actually use the EVO2 model.
So I'll just close down this and then we
can go through how the model works
before we actually try and run it
ourselves. Cool. So what they say is
that the human BRCA1 gene, so this
stands for breast cancer 1 encodes for a
protein that repairs damaged DNA.
Certain variants of this gene has been
associated with an increased risk of
breast and ovarian cancers. Using EVO 2,
we can predict whether particular single
nucleotide variant. So a mutation in a
single ATNC or C of the BRCA gene is
likely to be harmful to the protein
function and thus potentially increase
the risk of cancer for the patient with
a genetic variant. So this gene right
here repairs DNA that has damage and
damaged DNA is what causes cancer. So if
this gene isn't able to repair the DNA
because of a mutation, then you'll be
more likely to have cancer. So the idea
is to look for mutations in this DNA or
sorry in this specific gene and then see
if those um cause cancer. So first they
say we start by loading a data set from
Finlay which contains experimentally
measured function scores of
3,800 single nucleotide variants. A
single nucleotide variant is just a
single mutation in an ATG. So this would
be an SNB for example. So this would be
a SNB from C to A. Good. Then they say
these function scores reflect the extent
by which the genetic variant has
disrupted the protein's function with
lower scores indicating greater
disruption. So in this data set the SNBs
are classified into three categories
based on their function scores. LOF loss
of function
ental. We start by reading in this data
set. So first they just install some pit
packages. Then import some of these
packages they just they just installed.
This gave them this output. Doesn't
really matter that much. But then we can
then just check out the folder structure
again. So you see that there is this
this um Excel file right here. So this
Excel file contains some of the
variants. So they read this Excel file
which is the following one right here.
And then they print out the first 10
rows of this data frame and that gave
them the following output. So hopping
over to our Kel Draw, we can just go
ahead and go a little bit more in depth
with what this actually means. So each
one of these rows is a single nucleotide
variant. So a single nucleotide variant
has a location. So it has a location on
a chromosome and then the specific
location on that chromosome is called
the position. Hg19 is a human genome. So
that is just a reference genome like we
talked about earlier in the theory. So
the reference is what it was before the
mutation. So what it is supposed to be
and the old is what it is after the
mutation. So what it has been mutated
to. And then there is the class over
here that could be funk ins or loss of
function. So loss of function is
severely disrupted function. So that
basically breaks the gene and makes you
or sorry makes the body not able to
repair the damaged DNA giving you a much
higher chance of cancer. Int so
intermediate is moderately disrupted
function. So this partially impaired the
gene then functional oh functional means
that you have normal or near normal
function. So it doesn't really this
mutation doesn't really have that big of
an impact on the BCA1 gene. And these
labels right here have been determined
from the score mean. And what does these
scores actually mean? So the function
score is a measure of how well the BRCA1
protein maintains its DNA repair
function when a specific variant is
present. So these lower scores as you
see right here. So more negative values
indicate indicate more disrupted
function. So the variant severely
impairs the BRCS1 ability to repair the
DNA damage. And the higher scores so
closer or above zero indicate preserved
function. This means that the variant
has little impact on BCA's repair
function. So this also means that when
you see INT right here, this moderately
disrupts the function of the gene, but
you also see a very low score. Whereas
when you see all these high scores,
those are more correlated to FU and C.
So functional. So the low scores means
that there is a high chance of the label
being int. So that is what you should be
able to interpret from this or sorry
from these 10 SNVs that has been printed
out by the researchers that made this
notebook. What they then do is then just
group funk and ints into one group
called funk ins. So instead of having
three different groups, they have two
groups, they have one called loss of
function that is a mutation that
actually breaks the gene and then they
have one that is both benign and also
moderately disrupted function. So they
group these two into one and then just
generalize or abstract those two
differences away. So that is what they
do with this code right here. So first
of all they take these columns up here
they take that and then just rename it
to these other names. So chromosomes
become chrome position HD19 becomes pus
for example. So they rename it and then
they take these two groups and then just
group those into the same one called
funk int. And the result of this is of
course that all these rows that would be
either funk or int will then become funk
int. So this general class right here.
What they then say is that we build a
function to pass the reference invariant
sequences of 8,000 base pairs window
around the genomic position of each
single nucleotide variant using the
reference sequence of a human chromosome
17 where the BA1 gene is located. So
this may sound a little bit intimidating
but let's just hop over to the SC draw
and then just take a look at how they
actually go ahead and do this. So they
run a variant mutation just like we
talked about over here where we take a
sequence before and after the mutation
and then take a look at the difference
in the score. So this difference in the
score which makes this color lighter or
darker is the exact same score as was
talked about over here in this function
score mean. So it's not very it not it's
not much harder than that basically. So
let's say you have a reference sequence
that looks like this. Just imagine this
to be 8,000 base pairs long as they
wrote right here. So that is our window.
Then we would like to introduce a
variant. So for example, if the position
right here corresponds to this position
right there. Then we can see that it is
a variant. So let's say this was the
variant A. So instead of this A, we just
turn this into a T. So now we have a
reference sequence and we also have a
sequence with a variant within it. So
hopping back over here, we can see how
they do this. They define the window
size and then they open up this other
file called FNA.g. So just a a zip file
basically and then they this file
contains the sequence for this
chromosome with this sorry this
chromosome right here. So this contains
all this entire sequence of single
nucleotide variants. So this is the
sequence of single nucleotide variants
which is just one long string from
recordsequence. They then define a
function called pass sequences and this
will return a reference sequence and a
variant sequence. So these are the two
se sequences I talked about this one and
then one another one that is the varant
sequence where where it has been changed
from an a to an c. So these are the two
sequences that are returned from um this
function right here. So you put in a
position and then you put in the riff
and then an alt. So the position would
for example be this number right here.
The reference would be the a and then
the alt would be the t. So that is what
you that is the mutation you induce to
the reference sequence. Great.
So this position over here isn't zero
indexed. So the first thing they do is
just to subtract one from that since uh
they want to convert it to a zero
indexed position. They then define this
new variable called full sequence which
is equal to the full sequence for the
entire chromosome. So many more single
nucleotide variants than we actually do
need. And then they cut away all the
parts of the sequence that isn't within
this window. And within this window this
position should be right in the middle.
So that is what they're going for. So
let's say this entire sequence right
here is the full sequence. This full
sequence right there. They then
calculate these two variables ref
sequence start end and end start. So
these are based on the window. So the
start of the sequence that contains both
the variant and also not the variant. So
the sequence we would like to return are
the following ones right here. So let's
say this is the entire sequence and then
the window is maybe only 10 single
nucleotide variants. Well, that would
mean that you would have about five
single nucleotide variants to the to the
right and then five to the left and then
you would have this one in the middle
and then everything else from this
entire sequence and then is then just
cut away. So that is what I've been
trying to illustrate with the following
illustration. So everything without
outside this sliding window is cut away.
So everything outside these 8,000
nucleotide variants or sorry nucleotides
are just cut away. So this is just a
number for where to start the sequence
and this is just a number for where to
end the sequence and riff is is then
just a right here in the middle. So what
the what the mutation is before the
mutation. So this would then be the
reference sequence and this down here
would then be the mutated sequence. So
you just take the position from riff six
start sequence start all the way up
until the mutation and then you just
insert the variant instead of the
reference and then you take from
reference and then all the way over to
ref sequence end and then append that to
this as well. So now you have the
reference and then you mutated sequence
as well. So that is what I've been
trying to illustrate down here as well.
Again you just cut these long sequences
away outside the window. That is what
it's done right here. But then instead
of changing the variant or changing the
reference to the variant like that is
done right here, you just cut away this
and then you are just left with the
original sequence with the reference
being right in the middle. So hopping
back into the code that is what is done
here. You have the reference sequence
start reference sequence end. So it can
start in a position less than zero. So
that is why you say max right here. The
position right there is then the
position of the reference right here.
Then you subtract half of the window. So
that is what you subtract right here. So
then you'll get the ref sequence start.
So all this will be cut away. So that is
why you calculate this way for the
reference sequence end. You do the same.
You can't have a sequence start or sorry
a sequence end that is longer than the
full sequence length. So that is why you
put in a min. Then you can calculate the
sequence end from position dot and then
position plus and then half of the
window size. So that will give you the
following position right there.
You can then take the full sequence and
then just cut away all of the sorry all
of the nucleotides. So you cut away all
of this and all of this based on these
two positions. And that is what has been
done right here. And the variant
position is then redefined to be the
minimum between the position and then
half of the window size. So this will
give us the position of the single
nucleotide variant within this new
reference sequence. And now they create
the mutated sequence. So they take this
half of this sequence. Then they put in
the alternative. Then they take the rest
of the sequence and then just append
those together. So that is what happens
right here. They take the first part
this one. Then they take the variant and
then they take the last part and they
append those together to get the mutated
sequence. Then they do what is called
sanity checks. So they check whether
these things are correct or not. And if
they are not correct then something is
obviously very wrong. So they want to
throw an error in some way. So first of
all the variant sequence and the
reference sequence should obviously be
the same length because otherwise
something is very wrong. So this should
be the same length at as this one right
here. Then they would like to check that
this position corresponds to a letter
that is ref and this position right here
in the var variant sequence corresponds
to this alternative letter. So the
mutation so they just check that this is
actually a t and then they check that
this is actually an a and then they can
make sure that everything is actually
correct. Then what they do is just take
the first row right here. So this
position from a t to a g and then they
take that single row saved in this row
variable. Then they take the position,
the reference and the variance. And then
they pass this into this new method they
just created. Then they can print the
information of the row as well as the
sequence or at least part of the
sequence before and after introducing
the variant. So up here we they change
from an a to a t. So down here this
there should be a difference between an
A and a T somewhere in the sequence. Oh
sorry I can see that it is a T and a G.
So there should be a change from a T to
a G. So down here you can see that there
is a T right there in the middle and
there is a G right there. So this means
that the in that the mutation has then
been introduced in the variant sequence
down here. Then the research is right.
Then we load the EVO 2 1 billion
parameter model and score the
likelihoods of the reference and variant
sequences of each single nucleotide
variant. And then they say they strongly
recommend using the larger models and
they only use the small ones because
it's quicker. So they import the EVO2
model. So this is imported from EVO2.
EVO2. So EVO right here. And then
models. And then in here there is a
class called EVO 2 that can be used to
run inference with EVO 2. Good. So
hopping back in here, what they then do
is just load the EVO 2 1 billion
parameter base model. So this will then
download the model automatically from
hoging phase if not already in the
computer system in the hoging phase
cache. Otherwise, it'll load it from the
hoging face cache locally and this will
then also load the model into the GPU
memory. So you can actually run
inference with it. The next thing to do
is to build out build out a list of
variant sequences along with a list of
reference sequences. So this comes down
to looping through this entire list of
all these different variants and then
using this pass sequences method to
create a reference sequence and a
variant sequences and a variant sequence
then adding these two sequences to these
lists just for each single nucleotide
variant. So they loop through all of
these different rows in the data frame
and then they get the reference sequence
and variant sequence with this pass
sequence method and then they do some
dduplication right here because the same
reference sequence might have two
variants in the same place. So you don't
have to pass the or sorry score the
reference sequence twice. After doing
this they have a method called score
sequences that can be used to score all
of these sequences by running inference
on all of them. But first let's just
take a look at how this dduplication
actually go actually works. So if I
scroll down um for each variant the
sequence is passed to get the reference
sequence. The data set of variants might
contain multiple entries of variants for
the same position. So that is the issue
and because inference is run for every
single reference sequence and also for
every single um variant sequence. You
might score the same sequence twice or
even multiple times and that is just a
waste of processing because the result
is just going to be the same in both
cases. So over here I kind of describe
what goes on in this code and it's a
little bit complex but let me just walk
you through it. So we process two
different variants both in position 100
and then we see how this system acts. So
when processing the first variant right
here this uh ref reference sequences
list get the first unique reference
sequence added. This dictionary right
here then maps the unique sequence to
index zero. And reference sequence
indexes then stores index zero because
this first variant uses the reference
sequence now stored at index zero. And
the variant sequences then gets the
variance sequence added uh sorry variant
sequence added to that array. So this
will happen regardless of what happens
because two mutation one two mutations
won't be the same. So when processing
another variant down here also at
position 100 then this kind of caching
logic kicks in. So this reference
sequences array does not change because
the reference sequence is already
present. The reference sequence to index
does also not change because the key so
the reference sequence already exists.
The reference sequence indexes gets
another zero appended because this
second variant also that is also
analyzed also uses the reference
sequence stored at index zero up here.
So now this becomes 0 0 and then again
this of course changes because another
variant sequence is added to this
variant sequence array. So instead of
scoring this reference sequence right
here try right here twice by adding it
twice to the list. It can be added once
and then also scored once and then by
tracking these indexes we can know that
both of these variants should just use
the result of this score right here. And
this way we'll only need to do the
scoring for this reference sequence
once. And then down here we can see how
it actually did this caching process. So
it actually reduced the number of
reference sequence inference calls by
2/3. So they had EVO 2 had to score
3,800 variant sequences but only
1,326 reference sequences. So that is
quite a lot of requests to the EVO 2
model which will save a bunch of
compute. And after having built these
lists of all these reference and variant
sequences, the researchers went ahead
and scored those. So that is done right
here. And these variables will then be
lists of scores for each variant. So
index zero will be the reference score
in this variable for the first SNV. This
will the index zero here will be the
score for the first SMV just for the
variant sequence. And down here these
two lists can then be subtracted. So the
first variance score um or sorry the
first reference score is subtracted from
the first variance score. The second
second reference score is also
subtracted from the second variance
score etc. Then all the way through the
list. So this will give us the
differences between the scores from the
variance and references just for the
entire list at once and this will then
be added as a column in the original
data frame or original um grid right
here. So that is what you can see over
here and then the research just prints
out the first 10 records and that is the
print out. So hopping over to the sky
draw let's talk about what this scoring
sequences actually means. So this score
that is being calculated right here
score sequences well the score
represents the syntactical correctness
of the sequence. So more harmful
mutations will change the score more
than less harmful mutations. So the
worse the variants actually are the
bigger the difference in the scores will
be. So that is how you are supposed to
understand that. So to summarize that
reference sequence score minus mutated
sequence score is equal to how big of a
difference the mutation actually makes.
And the last part is then comparing
these scores. So the researchers went
ahead and created these two diagrams
down here. So let me just walk through
what they mean. So this diagram has two
different categories. It has variations
with harmful mutations and variations
that are likely benign. So not harmful.
So each one of these rows with the delta
score and the riff and alt class etc is
then plotted right here. So on the
y-axis there are two categories. There
are the funk in or ins meaning they are
likely benign and then right here in the
second category it says loss of
function. So these are all the different
rows that has loss of function as the
class and then the first one again is
just the all the different rows that has
funk or int as the class. This way the
researchers can can check whether the
general or average scores are lows for
the mutation with loss of function than
they are for the benign benign
mutations. So the less harmful ones. So
by plotting all of these different
mutations along with their scores and
then tracking the median or creating or
calculating the median you can see that
the median is a little bit lower for the
mutations with loss of functions that
they are for the mutations that is uh
benign. And what this means is that EVA
2 is able to predict that mutations that
actually cause a loss of function in the
BRCA1 gene are more pathogenic or more
harmful than they are if they are just
benign up here. So let's try out this
example in modal so we can just run it
ourselves instead of having to rely on
the researchers outputs. So, I'll just
go ahead and close this down. And then
inside my repo, I'll just say open my
Incred
terminal. And then I'll say pip install
modal and just let modal
install. Then I can
say modal and then
setup. And this should then just open up
the browser.
So, I'll just copy this link right here
and hop into the browser, open a new
tab, and paste that in. Now, I'll just
go ahead and say continue with
GitHub and then just log in. All right,
so I just logged in and now we're able
to create a token. So, I'll just go
ahead and say authorize and now we
should be redirected in a few seconds,
it
says. And I was redirected over here to
the dashboard. Great. So, hopping back,
we should be able to see that we were
successfully logged in. And then I'm
just going to go ahead and test that it
actually works. So if we hop into
documentation right now, I'll just open
that up and then say
guides. Maybe there's a an introduction.
So down here there is hello world. So we
just ran modal setup. Now we can just
create a new file in here. I'll just go
ahead and call that
main.py. So I'll just import in this
code right here. It'll import the
system. Create a new model app. And then
we'll just copy in this function as
well. This will create a function that
can run remotely or locally. Then I'll
just copy in this main function. This
main function is going to be the one
that runs. And that will then call this
function up here. It'll call it both
locally and also remote. So when you say
function.local, this will run on the
system you're currently on. When you say
remote, it'll then run on the model
cloud. And you can then specify what
graphics card should it run on. example.
So this means you can run GPU heavy
stuff on a GPU function only while
running other stuff on your local system
if you don't want to use the GPU. Cool.
So I'll just go ahead and save this and
then say modal and then run
main.py and just see what
happens. So it's running something right
now. Great. And stop the app. Good. So
let's just scroll all the way up and see
what happened. So it initialized uh and
then it created a run and then the blue
runs right here are the runs that run
locally or sorry that run in the cloud
and the white ones right here are then
the ones that run locally. If I then
just hop back into the model dashboard
right here refresh we should be able to
see a run. So I refresh stopped apps
maybe example hello world right there
and then we can see the run as well as
the logs. So it says world and down here
we say hello 1000. Cool. So now we at
least know we are connected to modal and
are able to run the code. So that is
perfect. So I'll start out by setting up
the docker image that is supposed to
contain the code. So we don't have to
build the docker image itself but we
need to define just what it is supposed
to contain. So hopping in here to
GitHub, we can see that there is the
setup guide. So you need to clone down
the repo, then cd into it, and then say
pip install dot. So pip install will run
this setup.py file right here, which
will then do a bunch of setup for you.
This most likely won't run on your own
computer. So I don't really do this. The
only reason I clone down the repo is so
I can look at the code and then import
stuff I do need and then everything I'll
run I'll just I'll just run in the cloud
with modal. So as you see, there is a
setup.py Pi file right here which will
run a bunch of code and then inside
vortex there is another
setup.py.py which will run some other
code inside operations there are these
other repositories as well which will
also contain setup files. So there is
there is a bunch of code that is going
to need to run and some of this code
from Nvidia will for example need a C
and a C++ compiler. So some of these
things we'll need to add when we build
when we build the der image to make the
requirements available for EVO 2 such
that it can actually run in the cloud.
So first I would like to just define the
image. So I'll say evo 2 image equals
and then I'll say
modal dot image and this will then be
dot from registry. I then like to use
the
Nvidia CUDA and then 12.4.0
zero and then development Ubuntu
22.04 and then I can say add Python and
then the Python version is going to be
3.12 just like our own local
environment. So when this Docker image
is being built it will start from this
base image right here which is based on
YUbuntu with support for Nvidia GPUs
with CUDA. So when the image is being
built, we'll need to do some apps
installs as well. So we'll need
build essential. We'll need cmake. We'll
need ninja
build. We'll also need
lib cut CNN 8. And then we'll also need
lip cut cnn8 defaf like that. Then we'll
need get. We'll then also need GCC and
then
G++. I'll just save that. So these right
here, those I just marked are essential
compilation tools. So many high
performance Python libraries used in a
artificial intelligence. So the ones
used inside vortex have parts written in
C++ or CUDA that needs to be compiled
during installation. So that is what is
being done inside these setup files. So
these packages right here provide the
necessary compilers. So GCC and g++ and
also the build systems such as Ninja and
CMake to be able to do that. And these
two right here provide necess sorry
necessary functions for deep learning
functions. So these are the NVIDIA QDNN
library. And this is also needed to
compile code that uses QDNN. So how
might you find out that these are the
ones you actually need to install to be
able to run EVO 2? Well, if you just try
and run EVO 2 and then you do not
include these, well, then you you'll get
some errors and then what you'll do is
you'll search online for the errors and
then somebody will say, oh, if you want
to use transformer engine or you want to
use vortex for example, then you'll need
to add these libraries and then when you
do add these libraries to the Docker
image, then suddenly it'll work. So, you
find out you need to install all these
packages just by trying to run it down
here. Let me just go back. just by
trying to run this right here on modal
for example and then when it when it
does install with just a base image and
the requirements installed maybe but not
any of these installed packages it'll
just froze an error you have never heard
of before and then when you search for
it you'll need you'll find out that you
need to install oh maybe you need this
maybe you need this and you figure that
out just from trying to run the code and
then you iterate on that we also need to
set an environment variable within the
system so we'll say environment and then
the name of the environment variable
should be CC This will point to user bin
GCC. Then we also need to set cxx. This
will point to user bin and then g++. So
after having installed these libraries
up here or these packages, we also need
to set these environment variables that
explicitly tell the build tools which C
and G and C++ compilers to use. And now
with these prerequisites done that are
needed to actually run these setup.py PI
files, we can go ahead and run this code
that actually clones the repository down
into our Docker image. And after that,
then install the requirements.txt files.
So, first I'll say
run commands. Inside run commands, I'll
put in get clone dash
recurse subm modules. And that is
because we have the vortex repository
inside the EVO 2 repository. So we need
to also fetch this one since it is
needed by EVO2 and it doesn't do that
automatically. So that's why we put in
this recurs subm modules. Good. So
hopping up here copying the https
uh location. We can just paste that in.
And then we need to say and cd evo2. So
that is being run sequentially after
this command right here. And then after
cd evo 2 we need to say pip install to
run the setup.py files like this. And
then one error I've previously gotten
when installing EVO 2 into a dark
container is the following. So I'll just
hop under
issues and then just remove these and
search for key
error and then I'll say recipe. Just
search for that. And then I can hop down
here. And then you see other users have
had the same error with the keyword
recipe. Just a error that doesn't really
make much sense. Scrolling down, I found
that you can pip uninstall transformer
engine and then you can say pip install
and then install a specific version just
like this person right here did. So to
just avoid getting this error because
I've gotten it before, we'll just go
ahead and run these commands right here
as part of the building docker image. So
I'll just hop back here and then say dot
run commands and I'll then run pip
uninstall-y. So just dash yes. If there
is anything that requires us saying yes,
then I'll say
transformer and then I'll say engine as
well as
transformer engine like that. So this
will uninstall the transformer engine
script or sorry a package. Then I'll say
run commands again and then I'll
reinstall it in the version we would
like to. So I'll say pip install and
then you can say put in two single
quotation marks like this and then I'll
say transformer engine like
that and then I'll
say
pytorch equals
1.13 then you can say dash
no build oh no build isolation like And
then lastly, because we're running this
example inside the notebooks BSA1. So in
here, the first step that the
researchers did was to install the
following dependencies. We'll just make
sure to have those installed in the doc
maintain as well. So let me just copy
these dependencies, close this down, and
then create a new file in here called
requirements.txt. I'll paste in modal
first of all and then I'll put in
metplot lip pandas seaborn scikitlearn
and then open pixel. I'll just press
save and then we can hop back into
main.py and just run a command that also
installs those. So we'll say pip install
from requirements. So this will install
primates from a file. Then we'll paste
in
requirements txt and just press save. So
we'll just name our app now. We'll say
variant analysis and then
EVO2. Then we'll pass in the image. So
we'll say image equals and this is then
EVO2 image. And then we can just create
a new function. So I'll say def test and
then this will just print out
testing and then this will be defined as
an app.f function and I would like this
to run on a graphics card. So the GPU
should be H100 like this. So this is one
of the available graphics card and this
is actually the one that is needed by
EVO 2. So hopping in here searching for
H100 we can see that this requires an
H100 graphics card um or some graphics
card with compute capability above 8.9.
We'll just use the H100 because it is
available on modal. Then what I'll do is
just let me just uh remove this function
right here. What I'll then do is just
delete all the contents of the main
function and then say test remote to run
it on this on this graphics card and
then I can just press save. This should
then build this entire Docker image.
This will only have to build for a long
time the first time and then this entire
Docker image should be cached such that
only the code that we change every time.
So when running this for the first time
it'll take a long time maybe 10 minutes
because it needs to build all of these
things and then it'll run the code
afterwards. Then we will run the code
again. It'll only have to print this
code out because this has already been
built. And because this is building a
docker container and actually or sorry a
docker image and actually works like a
docker image, this will also just cache
from the top statements just like a
docker image does. So right here when
the base image has been chosen, this
will then be cached and then the apt
installs will be cached after that. The
setting of the environment variables
after that. So this means that if you
run this once and then you change this
apt install command for example you add
another dependency then it'll have to
redo all of the commands after app
install along with app install. If you
change out the environment variables
then it will have cached until here and
it'll need to do the or redo the
environment variables along with all
commands after those. So the things that
change the least should be at the top of
this docker container definition. So
that is what has been done right here.
So just to summarize a base image is
set. So the operating system for the
docker image is set. The packages for
being able to run the setup files has
been installed right here. So the C++
compilers they are made references to
where these compiler files are at. Then
the EVO 2 repository is is downloaded
straight down or cloned straight down to
the docker image along with the pip
install command. This will install the
setup files and compile the necessary
packages um required to run EVO 2. Then
to avoid this uh key run recipe, the
following commands are run that will re
or sorry uninstall the transformer
engine as well as reinstall it in the in
the uh version we would like to. And
lastly, the requirements.txt will be
installed right here such that we're
ready to run the code from the notebook
whenever this has been built. And when
all of this has run, we should see the
print out testing because the code will
run after all of this. So to test this
out, we can say modal and then we can
say run main.py Pi and then press
enter. And this should then run all of
this in the cloud. And this will then
take a while. So I'll come back when
this is finished. So this finished after
just a couple of seconds. And it said
testing already. So it seems like it
didn't build all of this thing, all of
these uh layers in the Docker image. It
just cached the Docker image that was
used last time. So what we can do is
just to force the rebuild of the entire
Docker image. So up here I'll say uh
force built equals true. and then just
run this entire command. This will force
this cache to be invalidated from here
on and all the way down. So this will
rebuild the entire docker image. So I'll
just go ahead and say modal run main.py
and just let this run again. And then as
soon as this has done running in maybe
10 15 minutes, we can go ahead and
remove this force build equals true. And
then this should definitely because you
need to remove this as afterwards
otherwise it'll rebuild the entire
Docker image every time. So I'll just
wait for this to finish and then I'll
come back to you. All right. So my build
just finished and this took about 15 to
20 minutes. So as you see it ran through
all of these different steps up here. A
lot of
downloading and then it went all the way
down and then it ran the code at last
with the output we were expecting. So
now to just test out the caching
actually works, we can go ahead and try
and run this again. So we just need to
remove force build equals true of course
just so we don't have to wait 20 minutes
again and then press enter.
And now we see that it loads the image
and it runs the code, but it didn't have
to go through all these steps again. So
that is the power of caching like we did
right here. This also means that just
don't change these things for fun. Like
don't just go and add one of these or
remove one of these for fun unless you
want to wait for 20 minutes. So only
change these things if you really have
to do it. Otherwise, you'll need to wait
maybe 20 minutes again until the your
Docker image builds. Good. So I'll just
go ahead and hide my terminal here and
then we can try and port the
functionality of the notebook over on
into our main.py and then try and run
EVO 2 on model in the cloud. I will
start by creating a function that won't
run on a GPU. This function will be
called
BRCA1 example. In this function, I'll
say
print running
BRCA1 variant analysis
uh with EVO 2 something like that.
Great. And then I can say BRC1 example
dot and I'll just run that locally. So
the computation for scoring the
reference and variant sequences should
be done on a GPU in the cloud. But
obviously we can't really show a plot in
the cloud like the plot that was shown
right here. So if you scroll all the way
down, this plot obviously can't be shown
in the cloud. We want to show this
locally. So I'll just create this to
uh let me say run inference and then
show plot from return
data. That is kind of what I want to do.
And then down here I should be able to
just try and run this. So I'll say modal
runmain.py PI and this should then just
print out running
BSA1 variant analysis and this is in
white text which means it ran locally.
We'll then just create another function
for lifting the heavy load. This will be
called run
BCA1 and then analysis and this function
should be run on a
GPU. So I'll say GPU and this will be H
100 like that. I can then
say volumes and I would like to define a
volume quickly. So I'll say mount
path and then I'll say volume and we
just need to define these two things uh
further up. So I'll hop up to right
under Evo2 image and then I'll define a
volume. So I'll say volume equals modal
dot volume and then I'll say dot from
name and I'll say hf cache. That is what
we will call our volume and then create
if missing true. So if it doesn't exist,
it'll just create that and I'll then
define a string called mount path which
will be equal to root. So from root I'll
say root and then dot cache dot
hoging face like this. So this points to
the place in the yubuntu file system
where hoging face will download its
models to and then store those in a
cache folder. So inside this EVO 2 code
under init sorry under models this is
the class that loads the EVO 2 model. So
whenever you create a new instance of
this class what it'll do in the
constructor. So the init will be to
download this model from hawking phase.
So if you hop over here they then
provide these model checkpoints that are
hosted on hawking phase. So when you
instantiate a new instance of this model
it'll download these model files
automatically so that such that you
don't have to do it manually. So this is
what it'll do right here. Then it'll hop
in and otherwise download these models
from hoging phase. So to avoid the model
being downloaded every single time we
run our script, we'll attach a volume to
our modal container. So a volume is kind
of an external file system which we can
attach to our Docker container. So it's
kind of like plugging an external hard
drive into your system. And this volume
will be mounted to the following path.
And this path so just happens to be the
path that modal or sorry that Evo 2 and
hugging face downloads to whenever they
download the model file for you
automatically. So what also happens
inside this models.py file is that is
that if EVO 2 can't find the model for
you and is already in your file system
then it obviously won't download the
model for you again. So that is why this
folder is called cache. So first time
you run this function and instantiate
the EVO 2 class. It should then store or
download the file down to your local
system and place it in this folder right
here. It does that automatically. Then
because the volume is attached to this
specific folder, modal will handle
uploading the model file to modal and
storing it in a file system for you. You
don't have to do anything like
committing files. And then next time you
run the function again because the
volume is still attached to the same
place when you run the do container
again, EVO 2 won't have to download the
entire file again. It'll just take the
file that was already downloaded and
placed in the volume. So this just
caches the model file for us and
prevents it being downloaded every
single time. So that is why we use a
volume. So now we can define that this
volume should be attached when this
function specifically is ran. Then we
can also set a timeout. We'll set the
time out to 1,00 seconds. This means
that it'll be able to run for about 15
minutes before the function shuts down
automatically. And remember with
serverless solutions like modal for
example, you will be built by uh by
second ran. So if we just search for
model AI and then go to pricing then for
serverless you'll be built by second
ran. So if you say second for example it
cost this much of your credits per
second and then per hour it'll amount to
something like this. So if you run
without any breaks for an hour it'll
cost you about $4. So that is quite a
lot of runtime. So let's just hop back
and try and get it get this to work. So
the first thing we'll need to do is just
call this function. So run inference
I'll say run B RCA analysis and then
this probably returns something. So I'll
say
returns and then I'll go ahead and say
remotes. So this function will be run on
a local system and this function up here
will be run in the model cloud with this
GPU available. This way you will also
only be built for when used for this
function right here. And this function
down here will then run locally and
won't be built for that. So this uh
function run won't be won't be as
expensive as this up here because this
has a GPU available and this down here
does not. Cool. So let's just see what
we need to import to get this example up
and running. So first of all, if I just
remove that, we'll need to import all of
these packages right there. So we'll
just go ahead and do
that. So I'll just indent that. And then
because we added these requirements down
here, you can see with these three dots,
they aren't really installed. And that
is also why we see these yellow squiggly
lines. So opening up back up the
terminal, I can just say pip install and
then - r
requirements
txt. And yeah, I'll just install
mattplot.lip which is defined right here
as well as these other packages that are
also
required. And now they just resolved. So
the next thing we need to do is just
find out what else happens in here. So
we can at least start by defining the
EVO 2 model. Make sure that is ready. We
can define the window size. So the EVO2
model should be down here somewhere.
Right there. Cool. So we're going to
start by saying we'll go down and then
we'll say from EVO 2 import EVO 2. Then
we'll also define the window size. So
that was up here. This is just a
constant that should be defined in the
start of the script. Then we can say
print loading EVO2
model. We can then say model
equals EVO2 and then we'll pass in the
model we would like to work with. So
that is going to be EVO 2 and then 7
billion parameters. So this is one of
the models available. So hopping into
the EVO 2
repo, these are the models we have
available. This one will will require
multiple H100 graphics cards. So, we'll
just use this one for now, and then we
can test this out later if we would like
to. So, I'll hop back, paste this in,
and then I'll say print evo 2 model
loaded. Now, the next step is loading
the BRCA1 data set from the Excel file.
So, containing all the nucleotide
variants. So, hopping up here, this is
about what should be copied in. So, I'll
grab those lines, paste them in right
here.
And I just see a small error. There's a
yellow squiggly line here. So, we just
need to put in evo 2 right there
instead. And remember, this code will be
ran inside this Docker container. So,
we'll need to take account for the new
file paths that might not match up to
the file path from this from this uh
research notebook. So, we'll need to hop
in here and then just change this file
path. So, we'll call this
uh I'll just go ahead and
remove this join path.
So we just have a hardcoded path and
we'll then say EVO 2
notebooks BRCA1 and then into this file
right here. So this corresponds to EVO
2. So it'll start inside this folder EVO
2 and then notebooks BRCA1 and then the
Excel file. And this we'll just leave
alone. This head is just a print out. So
we'll just remove that. hop down and
find the next part that is supposed to
be copied. So these ones right here, the
renaming as well as the converting to
the two class system we can paste in
right
there. And then after loading in all the
variants, we should be able to load in
the reference genome right here. So I'll
just take this line of code, paste it
in, and this should then be indented.
And then the same way we hardcoded the
path right here, we'll just do the exact
same instead of the join here as well.
So I remove
that and just add this to the path
instead. So this just points to the same
path as up here, but instead of the
Excel file, it points to this uh gzet
file right
here. And after that, what they do is
create this pass sequence function. And
then they use this function inside a
loop. So I'll just take all of this
right now and just paste that right in.
So I'll just skip the pass
function and indent this correctly right
there and right there. And then instead
of this pass sequence function, I'll
just take the code and just copy that
straight in.
So I'll take this, copy it, and then
right here, I'll just replace that. So
it looks something like this. Instead,
I'll just need to remove a single
indent. And then remove this return
statement as well. I'll just go ahead
and remove the sanity checks. I assume
it works because we tested it. Then I'll
say
row and just index for the key instead
of having variables. And this will be
alt. And then I think there is one more
or the alternative. So the variant and
the position might actually be enough.
So I'll just go ahead and see what the
next part is. And that should be the
scoring. So hopping all the way down to
the scoring that is done down here. Then
the delta scores can be calculated. So
I'll take these, paste those in as well.
So right there, indent them correctly.
then this curve can just be calculated
down here. So I'll take
this and just add this right
there and just print this out. So I'll
say print and then something
like plus and
thenok. So the score right here I'll
take that paste it in. Next the plot can
be created but not shown. So, I'll take
all of this code right here and just
copy that
um and write on this or I'll indent the
code
correctly. And then right under here,
this is where we return the code back to
the local code or sorry, our local
machine and then show the plot over
here. So, we need to have something that
returns this variable and then we can
show the plot right here. So to do this,
I'll just encode this as base 40 or 64
and then return it to the other machine.
So my local machine and then show the
plot on my local machine. So I'll just
go ahead and say import base 64 and also
from IO
import bytes io like this. Then
scrolling
down I can create a new buffer. Buffer
equals bytes
io. Then I can say plots save
figure like this. And then I'll save it
to the buffer in the
format
png. What I can then do is say buffer
seek0 plot data equals base
64.base 64
encode. Then I can say buffer dot get
value and then dot
decode
UTF8. So the plot up here is saved as an
image and then it is encoded in base 46
sorry 64 and then because this is just
numbers that is decoded to one string
and this encoded string can then be sent
back to the local machine from the modal
container and then decoded again. So
I'll just say return and I'll return
variance first of all. This will be BRCA
one and then DF right here dot and then
to
dictionary and then I'll say
orient records right here. So this flag
right here will convert the data frame
into a list of dictionaries where each
dictionary in the list corresponds to
one row in the data frame and the keys
will then be column names and the values
will be the data from that row. We can
then just send back the plot as well. So
I'll say plot this will just be plot
data and lastly I'll just send back the
orac value in case we need that. So I'll
say and then or like this. And then I
just want to do one more quick thing
because right now we are analyzing all
the data. So this means that all of
these dots will be inferences being run.
So all of these dots are single
nucleotide variants. And this is quite a
lot. So I want to just run run a subset
of the data set, not the entire data
set. So I'll just hop up to right over
here somewhere. And then I'll say
BRCA 1 subset equals BRCA 1 data
frame. Then I'll say sample size that
will be 500. And then I'll say dotcopy.
So I'll only take the first 500 samples
in the data set. And then I'll copy
these into another data data frame in
this variable instead. And then of
course I just need to say BRCA1 and then
subset instead of the actual data frame.
And all the places that the data frame
is actually used right now, we'll just
need to or at least below this, we'll
just need to go ahead and resolve those
as well. So going down, it is used right
there, right there, right there and
there as well. And then these two last
places too. So if we just try and run
this because right now it is being
called, we can just see if anything
happens or if it completely fails. So
hopping into terminal I can say modal
run
main.py and then we'll just see what
happens when it is being ran in the
cloud. So it just ran for maybe 10
seconds and as you see it loaded the
image and then it says loading EVO2
model. So that is what happens up here
whenever you instantiate a new instance
of the EVO2 model. It then downloaded
the model files. That is what it does
when it says fetching for files. Then it
loaded the model into the GPU memory
right here. And then this has been
running for a couple of minutes. So now
what you see is the some progress bars.
And these progress bars comes from the
score sequences methods being called
right here and right here. So because
the reason this takes so long is because
it has to run inference for all of these
different variants or at least the 500
we picked. So we chose to to analyze and
this of course takes a lot of time even
though it is running on a large GPU. So
this will just take maybe five minutes
and then I'll come back whenever this is
done. So we just saw a small error right
here after finishing print or um it can
concatenate a string and a float. So
I'll just go ahead and remove this line.
It actually isn't needed. We do return
it down here anyways. And then I can
just run the entire thing again and then
we can just see if there are any
differences compared to the volume that
we have just um attached for example. So
what we should see is that when the EVO
2 model is being loaded, it shouldn't
download or fetch the four files and
spend like half a minute or minute doing
that. It should happen pretty much
instantly. So you see that is basically
done instantly and then it should say
say loaded EVO 2
model. So that is what we see right here
now. It loads the model into the memory.
So what takes a little while here is for
EVO2 to load the model into the GPU
memory, not the actual fetching of the
files. And the reason that we can avoid
this is of course because of the volume
that we talked about earlier that is
attached right here. So that is why that
happens. So now that this finishes in a
couple of minutes, I'll come back and
then we can talk about what we see. So
it just finished right here and you see
we don't see any errors and all the
inference was done um just as it is
supposed to be. We don't see any prints
either because we didn't really do
anything with the return statement. But
at least we know we can run the entire
analysis without any errors. So now we
can go ahead and actually just show the
plot. What I'll then do is just call
this results instead. And then we can
first say if the key plot is in results.
In that case, we'll just decode the
data. So we'll say plot data equals base
64. We'll just need to import this
B64B64 decode and we'll decode the key
results plot like this. Now we can say
width and then open and we can say
BCA1 analysis
plots.png and then we'll say
wb s file then we'll write the file to
the system. So we'll say f.rites
writes and we'll just write plot
data like
this. After having written the plot data
as a file as a PNG file to the system,
we can go ahead and say we just import
the functions needed to read the image
and also to show the image. So we'll say
import mattplot lip pipelot and we'll
just say plt. We'll just also import
mattplot lip image as
mpng. Down here we can then show the
actual plot. Let me just remove this.
Down here we can show the actual plot.
So this will be image equals
mpmg read. And then we'll need to read
the bytes actually. So we'll say from io
import bytes io.
down here we can then say im read and
then pass in bytes io and then plot
data. Now we can say plt do
figure and would like a figure with the
figure size 10 and
five then we can say
pltimage
show and we would like to show the image
and then plt.axis axis and we'll set
this to off. And then lastly, plc.show
like this. So now we should be able to
run this command again. So I'll just go
ahead and say modal run main. py and
then this should then show the plot
whenever the inference up here has
finished. So I'll just go ahead and do
that and then come back when that is
done. So the analysis just finished as
you can see here, but the container is
still running. So hopping over here, I
can see that this diagram popped up. So
it looks very much like the diagram that
we saw within the notebook right here.
Although just with less dots as we would
expect because we cut off to only 500 of
these different samples. So now we're
successfully able to actually run these
examples with inference on or with the
EVO 2 model on modal. So with having
done this, we should be able to go ahead
and build out the back end which we'll
need for the tool and then deploy that
before we build out the front end. But
before doing that, let's just hop over
to the Excali drawing and then just take
a look at what we uh what we're going to
build. So zooming in to back end right
here. What we're going to build is a
basic structure that looks kind of like
this. So we have already built the modal
image, but inside the code we'll build a
class. So we'll build a class that is
called something like a inference
endpoint or something like that. And
then this class will have two functions.
It will have an enter function and an
API endpoint function. So this enter
function up here will then download the
model and then load the model file into
memory. And this enter function is only
executed the single time when the
container is started. So this prevents
reloading the model into memory every
time the scale down window is hit. So
since this is a serverless solution,
there will be a cold start of 2 to 3
seconds whenever you hit the endpoint
for the first time and then you haven't
or sorry you aren't inside the scale
down window. So let's set say we set the
scale down window to 120 seconds. Well,
then modal will keep the container
running for for 120 seconds and then
close down the container again. And this
means you will be build for 120 seconds.
But that also means you will prevent
cold starts for 120 seconds. So it's up
to you to decide what the scale down
window should be. If we didn't have an
inter function like this, but just had
an endpoint and then loaded the model
inside into memory in the endpoint.
Well, then we would wait or we would
have to wait for the model to be loaded
into memory every time this endpoint is
hit. And this would make all of our
requests very slow and also waste a
bunch of processing that is definitely
not needed. So the next endpoint or the
next function we're going to create in
our class is going to be our API
endpoint. This is what we'll call from
the front end to run an analysis on a
mutant or sorry a mutation. So this API
endpoint will receive a mutation. It'll
then fetch the relevant sequence inside
the window or in a window around this
mutation. This function will then score
the mutated var or sorry the mutated
sequence and also the normal sequence
and then it'll compare these with the
mutation analysis with which we have
looked at earlier. Then it'll determine
the harmfulness from some threshold
which we'll define. So we can say if the
score is more than or sorry is less than
a specific number then it is harmful
otherwise it is not harmful. And this
will just be a pretty simple post
endpoint which will expose this
functionality which you can call with a
fetch from next.js. And a hogging face
volume will also or sorry a normal model
volume will also be attached to the
hoging face cache folder right here just
like we did with the other function. And
this will then just store the downloaded
model file from hoging face to make sure
the requests are even faster as well. So
hopping over to the front end here we
can take a look at what is or sorry how
the application is going to work. So in
the front end the person or the user
will first load the genome assembly. So
this might be HG19 or 38 for example and
this is just going to be the reference
genome for a human person. So this is of
course loaded from an external API and
then the user picks it afterwards. Next
after picking an assembly all the
chromosomes within that assembly is
loaded from an external API as well. And
the user then has two options. The user
can either search for a specific gene
within this assembly or the user can
click a chromosome and then the genes
will be searched for. So you'll only see
the genes within that chromosome. After
selecting a specific gene, the user is
then able to create a mutation and then
run an analysis on that specific
variant. So this step right here is what
we'll code right now in the back end.
All of the rest of the steps with
loading the data will be done with
public databases which which just happen
to have a public APIs for free. So we'll
create this endpoint where we can run
analysis on a variant and this will just
be done with modal with EVO 2. So that
is what we're going to build right now.
And this is the structure which we'll
also go ahead and build now. So hopping
back over here we can define a new
class. So I'll say class EVO2 model.
This will have two functions. The first
will be load EVO2
model and it will accept self as a
parameter. So in here we'll just say
pass for now. The next function is going
to be def
analyze single variant. This will accept
self along with the variant
position which is an integer along with
an
alternative. So an alternative will then
be a string as well. We'll also pass in
the
genome and the chromosome.
like this and this will also be a
string. So this is the information
you'll need to tell somebody where a
mutation is. You'll first of all need
the genome. So that is the organism
we're working with. This could be a
human for example. You'll then need the
chromosome in that genome that the
variation is placed at. Within that
chromosome, you'll need the specific
position for the mutation. And then
you'll also need the nucleotide that the
mutation has changed the reference
nucleotide to. So that is what these
four position or sorry four parameters
mean. We can then just put on a
decorator for this class. So I'll say
app cls for class. We'll give it a GPU
of H100. So we'll have this GPU
available. We'll of course attach the
same value. So we'll say mount
path and this will be the volume. We can
then say max containers. So we only want
model to be able to spin up three of
these containers at one time. This will
make sure we won't get overloaded
completely if that happens for some
reason. We'll then also say retries. So
it should be able to retry up to two
times. And then we can say scale down
window window 120 seconds. So it'll keep
this container alive for 120 seconds at
a time between requests. And now for
loading the EVO 2 model, we can go ahead
and start by
saying from EVO 2 import and then the
EVO 2 class like that. Then we'll just
say oh now just hop up and grab the code
which
we wrote earlier. So this code right
here scroll down and just paste that
in like that. And we just need to define
with decorator that this is actually the
enter function just like we talked about
over here. So hopping back I can say
modal.inter and just call this function.
This is just going to be a normal
endpoint just like you know a post
endpoint for example. So we'll say
modal dot fast API endpoint and then
this will be a post endpoint. So that is
what we define like that. When hitting
this endpoint for debugging purposes
we'll always just print out the
genome and then I'll
say genome like
this. We'll also print out the
chromosome.
will also print out the variant
position and also the variant
alternative. So we'll say alternative
right there. We'll then also define the
window size. So window
size which will run the scoring on this
will just be
8,192. Before we can run the actual
scoring, I'll just say scoring down
here. We'll need to get the sequence to
do the scoring on and then also create
the mutation or mutated sequence. But
both of these depend on this sequence of
nucleotides which we don't really have.
So in the example up here the sequence
was stored in this tarol file right
here. So that is where the researchers
got the scoring from or sorry the
sequence from. So up here somewhere they
loaded the sequence right there. So
we'll need to do this dynamically. We
can use an API of this and luckily there
are public APIs available for us to be
able to do this. So we'll just go ahead
and create a new function up here. So
I'll say def get genome
sequence. We'll pass in a
position a
genome a
chromosome and also the window size. And
we'll just set this to the same as this
for
defaults. Great. Now we can start by
importing requests because we'll use a
third party API to get the sequence. So
just hopping back to Excel draw right
here. I'll go back to my drawing. So
right now what we are experiencing is
the exact same problem that we had over
here. So we have a super large sequence
and we have a position where we would
like to introduce a mutation and then we
only want the nucleotides that are
inside the window on each side of this
mutation. So for that we'll just need to
calculate this starting point and this
end point which will fetch the sequence
um which we'll use to fetch the
sequence. So we'll first define a var
variable called half window and that'll
be equal to window size divided by two
and it'll round that if it's an uneven
number. This half window size will then
correspond to how much we should
subtract from this position to get the
starting point. Cool. So the starting
position will then be the maximum number
of zero because because we can't really
have a position that is less than zero
and then the position minus one uh minus
the half window. Then we can say end and
this will just
be let me just see position minus one
plus half window + one. So the reason
for the minus ones right here and right
here is that the genomic positions are
one based. So we'll need to convert them
to a zerobased system. And the reason
for the half window plus one is that the
API we use won't include the last
nucleotide in the sequence for zerobased
positions. So to make sure we also get
that, we'll just add one to that
position. And then for some debugging
statements, we'll just say print
fetching. And then let me just make this
a formatted string. So fetching window
size base pass
window around position and we'll pass in
the
position from the UCSC
uh API like this and then under that
we'll just put in another formatted
string where we'll say
uh
coordinates and these coordinates will
then be the
chromosome. We'll also have the starts
and the end. And then we'll just say
which genome it actually is. So we'll
say genome like that. So the API we're
going to use to fetch the sequence will
be the following. So I'll just open up a
new tab. Search for
API.gome.uc.edu. This will then be the
documentation for using the API. So what
it basically does is that it allows us
to browse through genes. So the
University of California, Santa Cruz has
a genomics institute that has all this
data available and then just lets the
public use it for free. So they have a
genome browser where you can select a
specific organism. So if I just click
this
link, it should take me to this page in
just a bit. So it says human right here.
You can then select human for
example. So this is a specific human
genome assembly. And then you can put in
a specific position if you would like
to. So let's just try and put in these
positions and press go. And then just
see what
happens. So now you get a big overview
where you can browse around inside the
genes in a human reference genome.
Anyways, hopping back to the
documentation for the endpoint. That is
this one right here. It says that we can
call the API with the following UL and
then we can pass in a genome which we
would like to use a diff a specific
chromosome, a start and an end. So that
is basically what we'll need to find the
sequence which we're interested in. So
to use this API, we can go ahead and say
API URL equals a formatted string
https and we'll say API.gome
genome um u sorry
UCSE.edu. We'll then use the action
called get data and then
sequence. So we would like to get a
specific sequence and for the query
parameters we'll pass in the genome as
it set. So genome equals genome. We'll
also pass in a chromosome which we'll do
this way. chromosome. We'll pass in a
start and we'll pass in an
end like that. And then we can use this
Python package requests to actually get
or to actually request this URL with a
get request. So I'll say response equals
requests.get and we'll then get the API
URL. The first thing we'll just check
for is whether the response was good or
bad. So we'll say if response do um
status code is not equal to 200. So 200
is the CSS status code for HTTP
requests. In that case we'll just raise
an exception where we say
uh fail
to to fetch genome sequence from UCSC
API. And then we'll just pass in the
response status code so we can see what
the actual problem
is. Otherwise, we'll take the response
and make it into JSON. So we'll say
genome data equals
response.json. We can then say if DNA
not in genome data. In that case, we'll
say
error equals genome data.get get and we
can then get an error and this will then
fall back to unknown
error. If the error returned from the
response appear does not exist then
we'll just say raise exception and we'll
raise
uci
error and we'll just pass in the error
like
this. So why do this you might think?
Well, if we hop into right here and
search for error, we can find an example
error down here somewhere. So, if we
just click
this, we should be able to see an
example error. So, we see that there is
a key in the dictionary called error
with this specific error message. So,
that is what we are interested in and we
would like to print out. So, that is why
we do what we do. I'll just close this
down and hop back into the code. If the
DNA key is in the response though, we'll
just say sequence
equals genome data and then get we'll
get the DNA key and say other. We can
then just do a quick sanity check like
they did in here. So remember how they
used a search to do a quick sanity
check. Well, we'll do the same in here.
So we'll go ahead and say expected
length and that is going to be end minus
starts. Then we'll just say if the
length of the return sequence which we
just had returned from this API is not
equal to the expected length then we'll
go ahead and say print and then
if
warning
received sequence
length length of the
sequence differs
from expected. So this way we will know
if that actually happens. So this way
you can kind of be notified if the the
if the APIs that you interact with do
not behave at as they're supposed to.
Otherwise if that is not triggered,
we'll just go ahead and say print or
not. Otherwise, this will happen.
Anyways, we'll say loaded reference
genome
sequence window and we'll say length and
just put the length in as well. So I'll
say length sequence and then
say basis right after that. Lastly, now
that we have the sequence available, we
can just go ahead and return sequence
and also where it started from. So we
can start by just trying out this method
right here. So if I just say get genome
sequence and then hop down and call that
in here, I'll then say I'll just do it
right there. I'll say get genome
sequence. And I would like to pass in a
position that's going to be the variant
position. Also a
genome that's going to be the genome.
We'll also want to pass in the
chromosome which will be the chromosome
of course. And lastly the window size
which will be equal to the window size.
It will then return
a window
sequence and a
sequence starts. And we can just go
ahead and print these out. So I'll say
print and then window sequence as well
as sequence starts. Then I'll just go
ahead and turn this into something we
can test locally. So this is an endpoint
right now and we don't really want to
test an endpoint. We want to say modal
do method instead. And down here in the
local entry point, we'll then say EVO2
model equals EVO2 model. This will also
call the enter function up here and make
sure it loads. This needs to be self.mod
by the way. Then we can scroll down
under this. We can say evo2
model dot analyze single variant. And
we'll just do this remotes and then we
can say variant position. So I have this
example prepared. You can say 43 11 9 6
28. For the alternative we can put in a
G character. For the genome you can put
in
HG 38. That's the human genome. And for
chromosome you can put in chromosome 17.
Now let's go ahead and save that and
then try and run it. So I'll open up the
terminal and then I'll say modal run
main.
py and I'll just wait for this to run
and then come back when it is done. It
just finished. So let's just check out
what it printed out. So first of all, we
see that it loaded the me the model into
memory like it did right here. That is
perfectly fine. Then it says evil 2
model loaded, printed out the genome,
chromosome, etc. We can then see the
entire reference genome sequence window
of the 8,000 nucleotides which we loaded
from the API. So everything seems to be
working perfectly fine. So that is
great. I'll then just go ahead and print
out the
following fetch
genome sequence window and then first
100 and then I'll say window sequence
and then just cut the first 100
nucleotides off. Good. Now we can just
calculate the position within the window
and then make it zerobased. So I'll say
relative position equals variant
position minus one minus sequence start.
Then I'll just say
print and then I'll put in relative
position within window and this will
just be relative position. And of course
this just need to be relative position
like that. And now I'll just do one more
sanity check. So I'll say if relative
position is less than zero or relative
position is more or equal to length of
the window
sequence. Well this means that the
position right here is outside the
sequence which we just fetched. So this
is obviously wrong. So we'll then say
erase and just something like value
error and then put in a format string
variant
position is outside the fetched window
and we'll just put in the start which is
equal to sequence
start and just say plus one and then we
can go ahead and say end as well. So end
equals this will then be sequence starts
plus the length of the window sequence.
Great. Let's just go ahead and find the
reference nucleotide because right now
we have the alternative but we do not
have the reference nucleotide. And
because we have both the position and
now the relative position as well as the
sequence, we can go ahead and find that.
So I'll say reference equals window
sequence and then just put in the
relative position. Now I'll say
print reference is and just say
reference like that. And now we just
need to actually analyze the variant.
But we don't really have any function to
do that right now. So we'll just hop up
to right AC above this sorry right below
this get genome sequence and then do it
right here. So it'll be about here. So
I'll say def analyze
variant. So this will analyze a single
nucleotide variant. So we'll need a
relative position in the window. We'll
also need the reference. We'll need an
alternative as well as a window
um sequence. And lastly, we'll need the
AI model. So that is going to be the EVO
2 model. Then we'll just create the
variant sequence now. So hopping back
into Excel draw, that is what we do um
right here. So we just take before or
sorry the first part of the window.
We'll then exchange the reference with
the variant and then we'll append the
second half of the window again. So it's
basically the same we do over here. So
we're going to say variant sequence
equals window sequence. So we'll cut off
um all the way up until relative
position in window. And so it's only
from the start and up until the relative
position in the window. Then we'll
append the alternative. So this is the
mutated single nucleotide variant. Then
we'll say
plus window sequence and then we'll pass
in the relative position in window and
then plus one and then cut off. So the
first part right right here is what
corresponds to this part right here. So
what this does is that it takes it takes
the window sequence and then keeps the
part of the window sequence from the
start of the sequence and then up to but
not including the specified relative
position. So not including the
reference. The alternative is then added
instead of the reference. And this right
here then corresponds to the following
part right here. So what this does is
that it takes the second half of the
window sequence right after the relative
position. So right after this new
inserted alternative and then all the
way till the end of the window sequence.
So this is then the reference sequence
and this is then the variable or sorry
the variant sequence. So we can go ahead
and just score both of these sequences
now. So we'll say ref score equals model
dot and then score sequences because
remember this is what we have done up
here as well. And then you just pass in
the reference sequence. And because this
score sequences is able to to score a
full list of sequences, we then we then
just take the first result coming back
after that. So I'll pass in the a new
list of sequences and this will then
just be the window sequence because we
only need to process this single
sequence right here. And then I'll just
take the first result of that. I'll then
create another variable called variant
score. This will then just be the
variant sequence and we'll just take the
first element from the return statement
of this function as well. We can then
calculate the difference between the
reference and the variable score. This
will then just be
delta score
score equals variable
score minus reference score. So hopping
into this right here, that is exactly
what they also did in the notebook. I'll
just close this down. If we found find
out where the scoring actually is that
is down here they get the reference
scores and the variable scores and the
varian scores sorry and then they
calculate the delta score which is all
the different variance scores and then
we subtract all the different reference
scores. So instead of subtracting from
these two with these two arrays arrays
because they have multiple different
sequences we only need to subtract the
first element of these arrays. So that
is what we get right here and then we
just subtract those two scores manually.
Now from the score we would like to
define whether this var variant right
here is um harmful or not. So we'll need
to define some kind of threshold to
define whether it's harmful or not
harmful. So going into the notebook,
what they did in the notebook right here
was just to plot the scores along with
the median and then the category. But
they didn't really define whether a
specific variant was harmful or not
harmful. And the reason they do they
didn't do that is because they already
know from the categories. So this is
loss of function variants. So these are
obviously very harmful while these up
here are not. But if we work with unseen
data where we don't have these two
labels, well, we need to find a
threshold which we can use to categorize
variance is either harmful or not
harmful. So instead of just picking a
threshold ourselves and then hoping that
that is a good threshold, we can use
some of this some of the data from this
notebook right here to actually pick one
for us. So we'll calculate some
thresholds in a datadriven way such that
it isn't just a defined threshold that
we did ourselves. That doesn't really
make any sense. So hopping into the
excalator right here, we can talk about
how that can be done. So let's talk
about calculating thresholds. So the
goal of this section right here is that
during inference, we would like an
output that is either likely pathogenic
or likely benign. So these are the two
classes that we should be able to
classify mutations into. So a numerical
score doesn't say much about the
severity of the mutation when a user
reads it. So this numeric numerical
score talk I'm talking about here is of
course the delta score. So if the user
sees a score like
minus0005, like what does it even mean
to a user? The user can't really
comprehend what that means and neither
can I. But the user can easily
comprehend whether imitation is
pathogenic or benign. So what we're
trying to achieve is abstract the score
into something that is comprehensible by
normal people. So the way we'll do this
is we'll define a single threshold/ a
number where if the score is above this
number, it is pathogenic. Otherwise, the
mutation is benign. So if the number is
too low, too many variants will be
classified as benign. But if the number
is also too high, then too many of these
variants will be classified as harmful
when they actually aren't. And that is
why it's important to define a threshold
that actually classifies these two
categories as accurately as possible. So
how do we actually define this threshold
number? Well, we can use the data from
the BCA1 example and then calculate a
useful threshold from the labeled data.
Because remember in the data set in this
notebook they had actually labeled the
data. So they had the scores right here
along with the class about whether it is
harmful or not harmful. So this funk int
means not harmful whereas lo so loss of
function means harmful. So with this
data available we can go ahead and use a
method which is based on the ROC curve
to actually calculate this threshold. So
down here is an actual ROC curve and how
it would look if we illustrated that. So
in short, this ROC curve will help us
visualize how well the delta score. So
this threshold right here um separates
the harmful from benign variance across
all possible cut cutoff points which is
the line you see right here. So you can
analyze this curve right here and then
you can particularly find the point
maximizing UN's index. So that is what
we see right here. And this will then
determine the most effective delta score
threshold used to use for
classification. That will then be the
perfect threshold for us. So on the axis
of this graph we have two different
things. On the y-axis there is the true
positive rate TPR also called
sensitivity. These are the fraction of
true benign variance that has also
correctly been identified as benign. On
the x-axis we have the fraction of true
true harmful variance that is
incorrectly been identified as benign.
This is called the false positive rate
FBR. That is also the same as one minus
specificity. So just hopping up here we
can just see the table that is the
excerpt from the notebook. So what we
can see is that the score is lower if
it's more dangerous. So the more harmful
the mutations are the larger the
negative score. So the delta score is
therefore negated by us. This means that
we just take a negative sign and just
put that on to all the different scores.
This means that the larger that means
this this means the larger the positive
number is the more harmful it also is.
This means that the curve will go up
like this instead of going the opposite
way. This uh the function for the RC
curve expects in that way. So that is
why you see this minus sign in front of
this delta score thresholds. So it's
just to take all these scores and then
remove the minus sign basically. So
we'll use a function. So an ROC curve
function from a scikit library. And this
will then just take all this labeled
data and then create this for us and
then calculate this U and J index and
thereby also the threshold for us. So
the higher we are on the Y-axis right
here, the more true benign variants are
then correctly identified. So we want
this number to be as high as possible on
the y- axis at the same time we want the
number to be as low as possible on the
x-axis. And that is because the x-axis
marks the fraction of true harmful var
variants incorrectly identified. So the
higher the number is on the x-axis, the
more incorrect identifications we do
have. So that is also the reason we
don't just take the highest threshold up
here just because it has the highest
y-axis number. So we need to calculate
some kind of threshold where we get as
many true positives as possible while
getting as many false or as as few false
positives as possible as well. So it's
kind of a tradeoff. So what you see
right here in the middle is the random
chance line. So these would just be
thresholds where the true positive rate
and the false positive rates are
identified equal. So we want the highest
true positive rate along with the lowest
false positive rate. So therefore the
top left corner is the best position if
that was possible. But that that of
course isn't possible because we can
only pick points from the curve right
here. So one way to calculate this
trade-off right here is with the
Newton's index. So Newton's index
maximizes the vertical line distance you
see right here letting us find this
optimal threshold. So this index is TPR
minus FPR. So we take this number and
then we deduct this number from that.
And this is just one way to balance the
highest sensitivity. So the true
positive rate with the uh with the
highest specificity so the lowest FP. So
by using this technique we can then have
the threshold calculated for us. So we
can actually because this is based off
of the notebook. We can actually go
ahead and go back to the code and then
find our example with BRCA up here and
then calculate the threshold from that.
So I want to go up to the right under
the ROC score and then I'll just create
a new section right here where I say
calculate threshold because this is
something we made ourselves. So we'll
just make sure that we know the
difference and then calculate threshold
and then I'll just say end. So I'll just
go ahead and do this. Then I'll say y
true equals and then this will be rca a1
subset and we'll take the class label
and then say equals equals lof. So loss
of function. So what this does right
here is that it creates a boolean array.
So an array where the values can be true
or false and true are the classes that
has loss of function. So this means that
the different indexes in the array will
be true when the class is loss of
function. So if we go up here where this
class is loss of function and then
otherwise the array index value would
then be false if this is funk int for
example. So a true positive would then
be where a loss of function would be
predicted as a loss of function and a
false positive would be where a funk int
is predict predicted as a loss of
function. So those will be the two axes
that we see right here on the ROC curve.
Now we can just import the function for
actually using this ROC curve. So I'll
hop all the way up and then say from oh
we can actually do it right here. We'll
say ROC and then curve. So we'll take
this and then hop all the way down here.
Then what I'll do is just go ahead and
say ROC curve and then I'll pass in the
YC Y true. And then I'll negate the
scores. So I'll say minus BCA subset and
we'll only take the scores and select
those. This will then return a list of
false positive rates, true positive
rates, and thresholds like this. So
thresholds will just be an array the
same for true positive rate and for
false positive rate. So this would be an
array of false positive rates calculated
at different thresholds. This would then
be an array of um true positive rates
calculated at the same thresholds
corresponding to the false positive
rates values. And the thresholds array
right here would then be an array of
numbers. So these would be the different
thresholds used to calculate the FPR and
then also the TPR. And then if we go
back right here, we can then see that
the UN if we want to maximize the UDS
index, we need to maximize where TPR
minus FPR is the highest. So we'll go
ahead and do that. So what we can do is
say optimal
idx. So index ID. This will then be TPR
minus FPR. And then we can say dot arc
max. So this will return the index
corresponding to the point on the ROC
curve where TPR minus FPR is maximized.
So since this is just the index, we'll
need to go ahead and actually get the
threshold as well. So I'll say
optimal threshold equals and then I'll
say minus threshold because we negated
it up here. So we'll need to negate it
back. So we'll say thresholds and then
we'll put in the optimal idx. Then we'll
just go ahead and create a new as we'll
say a new dictionary. This will be
confidence parameters because we'll also
calculate the confidence in this optimal
threshold. We'll then say or sorry
calculate the predict the confidence in
the prediction and not in the threshold.
So we'll then say threshold that is the
first ring we'll add. This will then
just be the optimal threshold. And then
below this we can say print confidence
parameters and we'll then just print out
the
confidence parameters. So when we run
this BRCA1 analysis function again we
should then see the confidence
parameters being calculated and also
print it out. But but before doing that
we can just go ahead and also predict
the confidence or sorry the confidence
in the model predictions and this is the
way we're going to do that. So the basic
idea is that if we calculate imutation
score that is going to be the variant
score versus the or sorry minus the
reference score and it is very far from
that threshold we can then be more
confident that the prediction is
correct. So to give you a visual example
let's say we use this notebook example.
So the diagram they used well let's say
we then take the category loss of
function down here and then we say that
the median right here is going to be our
threshold. So if we are on this side of
the median of the threshold then we
won't have a loss of function. But if we
are on this side of the threshold so the
less left side where the scores are
getting bigger then we'll classify it as
having loss of function so being more
harmful. So up here I actually actually
say the same just for the category here.
So let's say we use this median as the
threshold for
harmful/notarmful. So harmful on on this
side and not harmful on this side. Well
then these variants very close to the
edge we probably aren't as confident at
this as these variants out here. So if
you have a variant all the way out here
on the safe side, then this is probably
a safe variant. And if you have a
variant all the way out here on the
harmful side, then this is probably a
harmful variant. But these variants very
close to the threshold, well, we don't
really know if they are that harmful or
not. So we can't really be that
confident in the prediction. So the
further away the variants are from the
threshold, the more confident we can be
that the predictions are actually strong
and correct. So when calculating how far
away our var our predicted variance are
from the mean or sorry from the median
or the threshold which we'll use we'll
need to take the standard deviation into
account. So the standard deviation is a
measure of how spread out the values are
from the mean in a diagram like this for
example. So the more spread out the
values are generally in the entire plot
the highest the standard deviation is
going to be. So down here I say the more
spread out the values are the higher the
standard or sorry the higher the delta
score must also be before we consider it
far from the mean. So up here for
example with the loss of function you
can see that right here on the left side
the variance are very much spread out
compared to what they are up here on the
functional or sorry in the other
category. So let's say that we have
variant in the loss of function that is
predicted all the way over here. Well,
because there are so many other variants
already, we can say, well, probably it's
normal that they're over there because
they spread out that much already. But
up in a plot like this where all the
variants aren't spread out very much and
they are very close to the median, if we
do actually see a variant all the way
out here, well, then we can definitely
be sure that it's very much outside of
the normal range because almost all of
the previously seen variants are very
close to the threshold right here in the
middle. So from this we can then say the
confidence in the prediction can be
calculated as the distance from the
threshold divided by the spread of
scores for the predicted class. So to
make this even more tangible we could do
the same calculation down here. So we
can say the distance from the threshold.
So how how far away from this threshold
a single variant is. Well that's just
equal to the threshold or sorry the
delta score minus the threshold. So
that'll be for example the x position of
this one minus the threshold x position
and that will give us the distance
between these two points right here. And
then because we also need to take in
account the standard deviation. So how
spread the values are in this plot right
here. We'll then divide that absolute
distance with the loss of function
standard deviation. And the reason we
have a loss of standard deviation,
sorry, a loss of function standard
deviation instead of just a single
standard deviation for both categories
is because values are spread differently
based on whether they're classified as
harmful or benign. So we need two
different standard deviations. So as you
see in this plot up here, these ones are
spread out way more than they are up
here in the functional or sorry in the
benign category. So we do need a
category for both or sorry a standard
deviation for both. So this distance
from the threshold is put inside an
absolute function. So for example, we
might encounter negative scores or
negative distances because we have both
v we have both variance on the left side
and on the right side of the threshold.
So to always have a positive number,
we'll just put it inside an absolute and
we then just divide with the loss of
function standard deviation and then put
this inside a min function that takes a
minimum of the minimum number of either
this one right here or one. So we kept
the confidence to one. So since we
divide by the standard deviation, this
means that if the distance is more than
one standard deviation away from the
threshold, we then cap the confidence to
one. So there isn't really any rule for
this. It is just a definition we use. So
the score is at least as far from the
decision boundary as the typical spread
of scores within a spread group if the
confidence is kept to one. So if a
variant score is further away than the
typical spread of scores used to
calculate the threshold, well then we
can be very confident in its prediction.
So we'll just cap it to one. Cool. So
again up here with this first part of
the calculation. So this first term, we
then calculate the raw normalized
distance from the threshold and then it
is divided by the standard deviation. So
this is a normalization step to
normalize it to the actual spread. So
this will divide the raw distance by the
typical spread of scores for the
pathogenic class. So this basically
means how many of these pathogenic
standard step sizes fit into the actual
distance. So to actually go ahead and
calculate the confidence for a
prediction, we'll need to calculate the
standard deviation as well. So we can do
that as well right here. Um after
calculating the optimal threshold to
calculate the standard deviation, we'll
first do it for the loss of function
scores. This will be equal to BRCA1 um
and the subset of course then LOC. We'll
then say BRCA1 subset. We'll grab the
class column where the um value is equal
to loss of function and then we'll
select the EVO
2. Let me just see delta score right
here.
So what this basically basically does
right here is that it extracts all the
EVO2 delta scores values from the
variance that are classified as loss of
function in the BA1 subset data frame.
Then just returns a series which we can
calculate the standard deviation from.
So I'll go ahead and do the same just
for let me just see just for um the
functional or sorry the benign class. So
functional or int and this will then
just be f scores instead. Now for the
standard deviation calculation we can
say laf std equals bca or sorry lof
scores dot and we can just do std and we
can do the exact same just for the
functional scores. And we'll then just
say f score or sorry standard deviation
instead. We'll just need to change this
to st and then d. And then I'll just
print these as well down here. So I'll
go ahead and add a key and a value and
then a key and another value down here.
So we'll need to put in a comma and then
this should be printed out as well. So
now that we have the math ready to
actually go ahead and calculate these
thresholds, we can just do that by
running the BA1 analysis script again.
So I can go all the way down and just
comment this out and then say BRCA1
example
remote. So let me just check that this
is the correct one. And it certainly is.
So that is perfect. So I'll go ahead and
do that. Say terminal modal run main. py
and then just let this run and then come
back whenever we have something tangible
I can show you. So it just finished
running and now we actually have our
thresholds. So I'll go ahead and just
copy these in. So, I'll take this entire
line, copy it, and just make that a
comment for now. So, down here, I'll
just say new comment, and then say
thresholds, and then just paste these in
just so we have them for future
reference. Then I'll go ahead and close
down the terminal. And then just take
this comment up to where we actually
need it. And that is within the analyze
variant function. So, up here. So, I'll
just go ahead and create three new
variables. I'll create the threshold
like this and that will be equal to and
that is the following
number. So I'll take this just copy it
in. Then I'll create the loss of
function standard deviation that is the
following number right
here. Then I'll paste in the benign
standard deviation that is going to be
the following number right here. We can
then determine the actual prediction and
also the confidence. So I'll say
if delta score is less than the
threshold. So this is pretty
straightforward. Then the
prediction will be equal to likely
pathogenic. The reason we don't just say
pathogenic is because we have calculated
these thresholds. These aren't absolute
universal truths. These are something we
have calculated. So we can't be 100%
sure. So we say likely pathogenic. And
the confidence will then be calculated
from the formula right here. So I'll go
ahead and say confidence equals minimum
and this will be
1.0 and then the other value is going to
be the absolute value of delta score
minus threshold divided by loss of
function standard deviation and the
reason we say if the delta score is less
than the threshold is because we have
negated values. So remember up here I
think I showed you this earlier the more
harmful the values are the smaller they
will be. So this is a smaller value than
this one and this one is more harmful.
This means that over here if the delta
score is lower than this threshold right
here then we consider it likely
pathogenic. Great. So if it is above
this threshold we'll then say else and
then prediction equals likely benign. We
can then also calculate the confidence
just with the
functional standard deviation like that.
And then the last thing we want to do is
just return the information that we have
just calculated. So down here I'll say
return. I'll return the
reference. That's going to be just the
reference from up here. So I'll return
reference. I'll return the
alternative. So right there and right
there. I'll then also return the delta
score. So this will look like that. I'll
then return the
prediction. The prediction is going to
be either likely pathogenic or likely
benign. And then lastly, I can return
the confidence. So it'll look this like
this. I'll just call this
classification
confidence because that is what it is.
And then for these floats, we'll just go
ahead and say floats delta score
and
floats confidence as well. So I just
want to make sure that these two numbers
are returned as actual floats. Good. So
I'll go ahead and delete this threshold
right here. Then say analyze variant.
And then we can go down and call that
down here. So this will look something
like that. Results equals analyze
variant. I pass in the um relative
position in window that is going to be
relative position. We then also pass in
the reference that'll just be reference.
We pass in the
alternative. We then also pass in the
window sequence that is just going to be
window sequence as long as well as the
model that is just going to be
self.mod. So self domodel we get from
the enter function up here. So whenever
this runs when the container starts up
after a cold start, this will then
attach the evil 2 model instance to the
instance variable self.mod. This means
we can get it from other method methods
which we use down here. And lastly,
we're going to return something from
this endpoint as well. So if I just hop
down, we'll just say result and then
position. So we'll just attach this new
column of this new dictionary item
position. This is going to be variant
position and then say return result. And
this should then be all the different
information which we're going to need in
the front end to be able to render out
something nice for the prediction and
also confidence when the user analyzes a
variant. So we can start by just testing
it out locally. So I'll comment out this
BCA1 example and then I'll comment in
this right here with the example that we
know exists. Then I'll open up the
terminal once again. Say modal run
main.py. And now we should be able to
just say result equals and then
something like print results. And then
hopefully this should give us a result
that we should be able to interpret. So
let's just try and press enter and run
this. And then I'll come back whenever
this is finished running. All right. So
we have our first result coming back. So
what is being printed out right here is
the reference, the alternative AG, and
then we have the delta score as well as
the prediction that is likely benign,
and then the classification confidence.
We can't really see. So I'll just go
ahead and run this again, but only print
out the classification confidence just
to make sure that we actually have this
available and that it isn't just being
cut off. This classification confidence
is also a float, so we just need to wrap
it in a str like this just to convert it
to a string. Then I'll just go ahead and
say
classification and then append that to
the string. So classification and then
just go ahead and save that and then say
model run main.py and press enter. And
this should allow us to actually run
this code. So I'll just come back when
this is done. And now the classification
is being printed out as it is supposed
to be. So apparently there's nothing
wrong with our actual code. it was just
the classification that was being cut
out somewhere out out here on the right.
So that is great. So now we should be
able to go ahead and make this an
endpoint instead of a method we run
locally. So I'll com comment out modal
method and then I'll say modal fast API
endpoint instead. Just save that. And
then down here we can say modal deploy
main.app or sorry main.py. And this
should then deploy the app for us. So
it'll create this endpoint which we will
be able to call and then we should also
be able to see this if I just copy the
link right
here and then hop into a new tab and
just open it up here in modal. So we see
variant analysis evo 2. We then see this
class called EVO2 model right here. So
that is this one. And then we also have
this analyze single variant endpoint. So
that is the one we see right here. So
now that we know that it is live, we can
just try and go ahead and call it with C
URL here in the terminal and then try
and actually call it and see what we can
see in here in the dashboard. All right.
So I just had a small error testing. So
that is why I just open up a new
terminal and then what I want you to do
is just take this link right here and
just copy that. Then hop back into your
terminal say
curl- x and then it is a post request as
we defined up here in the fast API
endpoint. We can then pass in the URL
itself and then also the dummy data we
used earlier. So we'll say query
parameter variant
position that should
be 43 and then 11 9 six and then 28.
We'll then say and
alternative is equal to ag. We'll then
also say and genome is equal to
HG38 and chromosome is equal to
chromosome 17. If we then just press
enter that should trigger the endpoint.
So going over here we can see that we
have one cold starting endpoint
containing right now. So that should be
possible to see right here in the
function calls in just a second. So that
is this one.
So I'll just go ahead and wait for this
that to finish as well. So it just
changed from pending to status 200. So
opening it up. Let's just see what it
printed
out. So we see post 200 which is fine.
And then we see these debugging blocks
that we also printed out locally. So
that looks perfectly fine. Hopping back
into the terminal we then get reference
alternative. we get the delta score, the
prediction likely benign as well as the
classification confidence and position
right here. So with that done, we have
actually deployed our entire back end
which is this analyze single variant
endpoint. And right now even though it
is deployed and ready to be run, we
aren't getting build because this is
running serverless. So we only getting
build for the startup and then the
execution of these containers. So with
the back end built out and deployed, we
should be ready to go ahead and build
out the front end. Now what I'll first
do is hop into my browser and then
search for the T free stack. That is
what will will initialize our next JS
app from then I'll click this copy
button and say npm hopping back into my
terminal or sorry my VS Code right here.
I can then say open folder and then I
would like to find my repositories and
then just the variant analysis folder
right here. Now we see that we have the
backend folder already. So we'll open up
a new terminal in the root right here
and then paste in the command that we
just copied.
Our project should be called uh front
end or something like that. So I'll say
evo to sorry
varants
analysis and then evo 2 front end like
this. Then I'll use typescript t1 css
node to tpc I would like to just go
without authentication just for this
time. And then I'll select none. And
then I would like to use the app router
and then ESL lens. And then I would like
to also not initialize GitHub
repository. You might want to do this
though if you would like to store this
in the GitHub repo. Then I'll just say
yes to npm install. And then just insert
on this one as well. And then I'll just
wait for this to finish and then come
back when it is done. So just finished
installing all the npm packages. So one
thing I would like to do is just rename
this to EVO 2 front end. and then just
this back end to evo to back end just so
we have some more standardized naming.
Then what I'll do is just open up a new
folder right here in VS Code. Then just
select my folder and then EVO 2 front
end. And then I'll just open this as the
project project that is opened up. Cool.
Then under npm scripts, we should be
able to press def right here. If you
can't see npm scripts, you should be
able to right click and then select npm
scripts. Otherwise, you might need to
click the package.json JSON and this
menu right here will appear or at least
the option to have it open up. So I've
just opened up the VS code in the left
pane and then the browser over here in
the right pane. This means we can
actually see what we code while coding
it. So I'll just copy this command or
sorry copy this URL right here and paste
it in into my browser and then we should
be able to see the actual application
running. So that is what we see right
here and we are hosting it locally. So
the first things we can start doing uh
are just renaming the actual page up
here. So we would like to create a
single page. So if I just open up
Excal then we can just go through the
flow quickly. So I would like a single
page where all of this can be done. So
this means that first of all we create a
simple page where a user can load a
genome assembly. So this would be HG38
for example. And the list of genomes
we'll get from the following API right
here. And then after doing that, we'll
be able to uh to build out the next
steps, which is loading chromosomes,
genes, selecting genes, and then also
running an analysis on those variants
that the user then creates. So, hopping
up here, I'll just select my uh page
again. And then we can see that it says,
let me just make this a little bit
bigger. We can see that it says create
T4 right now. And that is not what we
want. I'll just close down these as
well. This one, this one, and just leave
that. So I would like this to be
something like EVO2 variant analysis. So
to do this we'll hop under the app
folder right here and then into layout.
And inside this layout file we can
define the metadata. So right here I'll
just say EVO2
variants
analysis and just do the same for the
description and press save. And now we
should see that up here. We still see
this little Tfree logo though that is
called the favicon. The favicon is
stored inside the public folder right
here where we can store all where we can
store all of our static assets. So
instead we'll just use a service online
to create a new one instead of T3. So
I'll just search for favicon generator
and then text and then we should be able
to find one where we can actually
generate our favicon. So right here we
can say text to icon and then I'll just
say wa as a text for variant analysis.
I'll just pick something like enter. And
then for the fun color, I'll pick
green. Something like this. And for the
background, I'll just pick
white. Uh maybe a more of a creamy
color. Or let me just go with white. And
then a darker color like this. Then for
the font size, let me just make it a
little bit smaller like that. So let me
just download this favicon right here.
And then I can upload it into or sorry,
I can copy paste it into the public
folder here. So I just pasted or sorry
copied the favicon.io file into my clip
folder and then I can paste it into the
public folder right here. So I'll go
ahead and delete the original favicon
and then just rename this to faviccon.
And then going back we should be able to
see the correct favicon if we say
reload. And now we can say that it says
W or sorry VA for variant analysis
instead of just T3 stack icon. And then
we'll need to install some mpm packages
as well. So one we'll need is going to
be Lucid React. This is just a package
for managing icons. So we can use a
bunch of different icons through this
package. So all these icons we can just
import. So we'll just go ahead and
install that. So we'll choose npm, copy
the command, open a new terminal, then
say npm install lucid
react. We'll also just need to install
chaten which we'll use for some of the
styling. We'll um customize the styling
a bit ourselves, but we'll use some of
the features in cien such as the cards
for example. So this card right here we
can at least use that is very useful so
we don't have to define that ourselves
and then we'll style it with our own
color schemes style etc. So first we'll
just go ahead and install shenm for
nextjs. So that'll be npm and then we
can just go ahead and install it right
here. Paste into the
terminal say y to install the newest
one. neutral and then just use
force. And now that is done. So we can
start by just importing a simple button.
So I'll just go ahead and copy this and
just paste that
in use
force. And now we should under
components be able to see / UI and then
/button. So this is not something you
should go ahead and edit because this is
just what was generated by chatm. So now
because we just installed this button
component into our system, we can go
ahead and use the button as you see
right here along with all its features,
styles, etc. You can also style
yourself, which is what we're going to
do. So let's get started with the actual
application in here. Right now, we get
an error. So I'll just go ahead and
restart the terminal in case something
wasn't completely noticed by NextJS
whenever we installed this. So I'll just
refresh the page over here.
So I just spent five minutes looking
into this and apparently if you go to
chaten to the GitHub
repository they changed something
regarding Tailwind animate CSS about 50
minutes ago. So right before installing
the actual package and this is what
causes the following error. So I'll go
ahead and just install this package
manually. So, I'll copy this command,
paste it into the terminal, and then as
you can see over here, when I do install
it, it should fix itself over here. And
now, we'll no longer see the error. So,
this is just a small bug in the shet
repo. Right now, it's probably fixed by
the time this video comes out, though.
We can now get started with designing
this page um in itself. So, we can go to
page.tsx. I'll make this a little bit
smaller and hide the terminal. And then
just also this page, this pane over
here. So what I would like to do is just
first of all remove the content of this
homepage component. So this page
component right here is what renders out
this entire page. And this page
component is being wrapped inside of
this layout. TSX. So it is being wrapped
with an HTML and also a body tag. This
right here is a server component. So the
layout file is going to be a server
component. And this page tsx is also
server component right now. But this
will probably become a client component.
So we can use states within it. So the
first thing I would like to do is just
change this uh main right here. So I'll
go ahead and just create a single div
with the class name minimum height of
screen and then also a background color
that is going to be hashtag and then e 9
e and then a. We just need to close off
the parenthesis. So it's more of a
creamy color compared to a regular white
color. As you can see that is what I
wanted. Then we'll go ahead and create a
header. So, first I'll just put in a
header tag. So, I'll say header. And
then I'll say class name border bottom.
And then I'll put in the border color,
which is going to be hashtag 3C. And
then 4F 3D. Save that. And then say BG
whites. And now we can put in a height
for example of seven just to test that
it actually works. So we do see the head
up here. So that looks great. And I'll
just say divided by 10 over here. So,
what this does when I just hover it is
that it says 10% um color. So, when I go
ahead and save this, the border should
be way less accentu accentuated. So,
I'll just say border B instead of border
bottom. And then try and remove this.
So, now this is what the border looks
like without the 10% filter. And then
when I put on this, which removes 90% of
the color, it it looks way more subtle.
Okay, I would like to just remove this
height and then just let the height be
determined by the actual contents of
this div. So I'll put in another div and
I'll say class name container MX auto px
of six and py of four. So the container
class right here will set a maximum
width for the elements and then the MX
also will help center it horizontally.
And this is just a padding horizontally
and this is a vertical pad padding.
Inside this I'll put in two elements.
The first element is going to be a div
with the class name relative. Inside
this relative, I'll put in a an H1.
Inside this H1, I'll put in two spans.
The first one will say EVO, and the next
span will say two. I'll then just do
some styling for this H1. It is going to
be text extra large font light tracking
wide like this. And then also text. And
then the text will be
#3c and then
4f 3D like that. And down here I'll say
class name
font normal. And then for the two I
would like to color that orange. So I'll
say class name text and then color it de
and then 82 and then 46. So it'll look
something like this. Now we can also put
in a cool little effect. So a little
border. So I can put in this diff and
then say class name absolute minus
bottom one left zero a height of 2
pixels width of 12 and a background that
is the same as the orange color up here.
So it's going to look like this. So the
reason it can be positioned like this is
because it has absolute and then it is
wrapped within a div that has the
relative tag or the relative class up
here. So it is positioned relative to
this class right here. Now I would like
to also just add another span right
here. And this band should say variant
analysis. So it'll look like this. But
then instead of this being below the
EVO2 logo, I would like it to be to the
right of it. So I'll put in another div
and then give it the class name flex
items center. And just copy this div tag
down here. And now when I save, they
should be next to each other like that.
Then I would also like to put in some
spacing between these. So I'll just go
ahead and put in a gap of three. Then
put in some classes for this text. So
I'll say text small font lights and then
text. And then I'll put in 3 C
4D or sorry 4F and then 3D. And then
I'll say with 70% opacity. And I just
need to spell this correctly like that.
So now we have this pretty cool header
down which can be reused throughout our
page. So that is great. So now I would
like to put in the actual contents of
the page right here. So the first thing
I'll do is put in a card. So if I hop
into chat cn. So right there we can then
go ahead and install the card. So I'll
find the card and then edit right here.
So I'll do this terminal open a new
terminal and then add the
card. That should
then install the card over here under
components/card and then I can just
restart the
server and we should then be able to
actually go ahead and use it. So under
the header right here I'll say main put
in this main tag and then I'll put in a
container as well. MX auto px of six and
then py of six. I'll then put in a card
component. So I'll say card reference to
the shaden card. And we do need a
closing tag. So I'll go ahead and say
card. Inside this card, I'll put in some
classes. Margin bottom six, gap of zero,
border none, bg py zero, and shadow
small. We can then also import a card
header. So we can say card header like
that. And then just put in a closing tag
too. And then for the classes we will
say uh padding top of four and then
padding bottom of two. Inside the card
header we'll put in a div. Inside this
diff we'll put in some class names. Flex
items
center
justify
between. Inside this div, we'll put in a
card
title like
that. The card title should contain
genome assembly. So, I'll just save that
and then just try and refresh over here
to see if it's Yeah, now we see it
didn't really load before, but now it
loads. Cool. And then we just need to
style the card title a little bit
because it doesn't really look that
great. So, I'll say text small font
normal. And then I'll say text. And we
just want to copy the same text color
with 70% opacity like up here. So, I'll
go ahead and do this. Press save. And
now it looks way better. Just need to
spell this correctly though like that.
And then I would like to make the user
aware that they're actually working with
the human genome and then they can pick
a genome assembly within the human
genome. So to do this I'll just say diff
and then organism and I'll put in a span
that says human. And the span should
just uh make the human text bold. So
I'll say font medium like this. And we
just need to make this text a little bit
smaller as well. So I'll say text extra
small and then I'll put in this text
right here and just make it um 60
instead so it's a little bit less
visible. So when we put in the picker
right here, the user should be able to
see that they can pick a genome assembly
from the organism which is the human. We
can then go ahead and get the actually
available genomes. So I'll do this in
another file. So I'll hop under source
and then create a new folder called
utils. Inside your tools, I'll create
one called genome
API.ts. And here I'll say
export asynchronous
function get
available
genomes like
that. And then just spell this
correctly. Available genomes. And then
we can just say console.log
log hello for example and then for now
I'll just take this and just call it
once right here. So I'll say use
effect and then I'll call the following
function on use effect get available
genomes and then just pass in an empty
dependency array making sure that it
that it is only called once and I'll
just go ahead and await it since it is
asynchronous and we can't do that
because we enter the use effect. Let's
just see if we can make this async. We
can not as well. So we what we'll do is
say const fetch
genomes and that will be an async
function and then we can put get
available genomes into that and then
call fetch genomes like this. So to be
able to work with the data that is
returned from this get available genomes
we can just say const data equals we'll
need to put it inside an async function
such that we can actually wait it
otherwise we won't be able to get
anything but the promise that is
returned from this get available genomes
function. So if I just hop in to the
console over here press F12 we should be
able to see a print
out. So I'll just hop back in here see
what is happening. So this needs to be a
client component. Use client and the
reason is that we're using a hook inside
the component. So that is just what we
need to do. And now it says hello
whenever we refresh it. So that is
perfectly fine. Cool. So I'll go ahead
and just implement some logic to
actually fetch these genomes. So I'll
say const API URL equals
https
api.gomesc.edu. And then I'll say
slashlist slash USC sorry UC Santa Cruz
and then genomes like this. If I just
take this URL again and just open up a
new
tab, we should be able to see the
documentation. So we should be able to
list out the genomes and that is what
we're doing right here. So that is
basically what we're doing as well. If I
just go into this URL as well and pretty
print that we should be able to see what
it actually returns. So we get out the
US or UCSC genomes and then for each
genome we have a description for example
we have whether is active or not and the
key for the genome right here this key
dictionary key will then be the ID for
the genome. So what I'll do is just
define a type which we can use to make
the data we get returned from this API
type safe in our next JS application. So
I'll call this type um I'll just export
the interface. I'll call this type
genome assembly from search because it
is something that comes from a search.
Then I'll put in an ID which is a
string. I'll also put in
a name. I'll put in a default position
as well as active. And this default
position might actually not be needed.
So we'll just leave that out. And then I
can just go ahead and fetch this APA API
endpoint. So I can say con
response equals await and then fetch and
we'll fetch the API URL. We'll then just
check if the response is okay or not. So
I'll say if not
response okay. Then we'll throw a new
error fail to fetch genome list from
UCSC API.
Then we can go ahead and grab the actual
data from the response. So we'll say
const genome data equals a weights
response.json. We'll then just check if
we can find this key right here UCSC
genomes. So I'll say if and then not
genome
data dot UCSC genomes then we'll also
throw a new
error saying UCSC API
error missing
UCSC genomes. And now that we know that
it is not undefined, we can go ahead and
say const
genomes equals genome data UCSC genomes.
And since genomes can be genomes
assemblies for different organisms. So
right here it's an American alligator
for example. This is a lizard. This is
also a lizard. We'll need some way to
handle that. So in case you would like
to work with other organisms, we will
make the system so it's able to handle
that. But for our case, we'll only work
with humans. But it still will like to
create a record where the key is going
to be the organism and the value is then
going to be the data up here about that
organism. So I'll say const and then
structured
genomes of the type record where we have
the string which is the organism and
then we have the genome assembly from
search. So each organism can have
multiple of these genome assemblies over
here. And then we'll just say that that
is equal to an empty dictionary for now.
And then we can go ahead and populate
this dictionary in a loop down here. So
I'll say for const genome id in genomes.
We can then go ahead and get the genome
info. So I'll say const genome info
equals
genomes and we'll index in with the
genome ID like this. The genome info
will then be this dictionary right here.
So the content of the dictionary value.
So first we'll just grab the organism.
So I'll go ahead and say const organism
equals and then genome info dot organism
or other if that for some reason isn't
there. So this will grab the following
key and value right here. Then I'll push
this info to the dictionary up here. So
I'll go ahead and say if not structured
genomes and then organism. So if the
organism hasn't been added right here
yet as a key then I can say structured
organism or structured genome sorry
organism is equal to a new array. So
then we'll add this record right here
but just make this array empty. And this
of course needs to be if then below this
I'll
say structured genomes and then
organism dotpush and we would like to
push a new genome assembly over here and
the genome assembly contains the ID
which is the genome ID. It will contain
a name. We'll just say that is the
genome
info
dot description. So description right
here and I'll just make sure this genome
info is spelled correctly like that
genome
info.escription. We'll also say that if
this is not there for example then we'll
just call it the genome ID. So otherwise
we'll use the genome ID as the name.
Then we can go ahead and define the
active or not. So this will just be
genome data or sorry genome info
doactive. And over here we can see
boolean can be string. So of course
active needs to be a boolean and not a
string. And the reason there are two
exclamation marks right here is to
convert the one over here to a true. So
it'll evaluate the one to a true and if
it's zero it'll just evaluate to false.
So that is basically what happens with
these two exclamation marks. Good. So
with that done, I'll just add one more
thing and that is the source name. So if
I say
HG38 down here, there's also a source
name that is a little bit more in depth
about the name. So I'll go ahead and
just add that as well. So I'll say
source name. And then down here I'll say
source name equals genome info dot. And
then I can do source name. Uh, and if
it's not there, then we'll just
say Gino ID right here, just so it has a
fallback value, even though it should be
there all the time. The only reason
we're doing this is because we can't in
fact be 100% sure that all of these keys
are always present. So, we just do this
just to have some fallback value in case
that happens. Good. So, hopping back
into the page.tsx now that we return or
sorry, we don't actually return anything
yet. So I'll just go ahead and under
this for loop say return and then
genomes and this will just be structured
genomes. Good. Hopping back here I can
then say console.log data and then we
can just check out whether we getting
something we would expect. So hopping in
here and just refreshing we now see
genomes on load and this contains a
bunch of different genomes. So if we
just print out the ones that are human
only, we can do this human, but we of
course just need to say genomes first.
Print that out. I'll just refresh over
here. And now we see undefined. So
hopping back into the genome API, what
we need to do is just check whether this
indexing key is correct. And right now
it says genome
data.organism. So hopping in here, it's
actually going to be genome info. So
genome
info.organism, that will give us the
organism right here. and we can use that
as the key for the dictionary. Good.
Hopping back and refreshing, we now see
that we have six printouts after we
fixed the error. We have these six
different genome assemblies for the
human organism only. If I just remove
this key, we should be able to see all
the different organisms. So, we have
African clawed frog, we have a American
alligator for example, all with the
genome assemblies inside of it. So
inside this component we'll create some
use states. We'll create a state for
loading. So we'll say const and then is
loading and then set is loading as well.
This will just be a global is loading
state for all the you all the fetches
that we'll have inside of this
component. We'll say equals to use state
and this will just be a boolean. It
might infer this itself. This will just
be a boolean. So we'll just set it to
false for default. Good. We then also
store the genomes inside a state. So
we'll say const genomes set genomes is
equal to use state. This will be genome
assembly from search and an array of
those. And this will just be an empty
array per default. And up here we just
need to do this. So we say type in front
of the actual interface. And then we'll
also just create a use state for storing
an error. that might happen if this
doesn't work. So we'll say error and
then set error and this error will just
be an empty string for now or actually
we'll make it string or null. So string
or null. So if there's no error error it
will be null otherwise it will be a
string. So it'll just be null per
default. So what we can now do inside
this use effect is the following. We can
say
try and then we can say catch
error and then error like this. We can
then say set error if there is an error
and this error will just be fail to load
genome data. We won't really be able to
use this for anything. And we'll just
show the user the following message
right here. Then we can say
finally. And so then the first thing
we'll do inside the try is set is
loading to true. Then we can in finally
so regardless of whether the error
happens or not we can say set is loading
to false. Right outside right inside
this try we'll then say con data equals
get available genomes. Then we can say
if data genomes
and data.gomes
genomes human. So if there is the human
organism, then what we'll do is set the
genomes to the following right here as
well. So this should then load all of
the genomes for us on load whenever the
page reloads over here. So that is
exactly what we want. Then I'll also
just create another use state up here.
This will be called selected genome. And
I'll then say set selected genome. This
will then just be a single selected
genome. So I'll just use the string and
then the one that should always just be
selected is going to be HD 38. So that
is just a default one. And that should
always be available. Good. So hovering
back over here, if we scroll down to
just below this card header, we'll just
put in a card content
too. Inside this card content, we'll put
in a class name which is padding bottom
four.
So we'll just need to do this padding
bottom four. And then for the card
content, what we'll put in is going to
be a select. This select we'll just need
to install from shad CN. So I'll open up
the terminal and just open a new one.
Search for shad cn. We can actually just
do it in here. So in here we'll find the
select and then just find the install
command. Paste it in.
use
force and then just restart the
development server. So I'll just go
ahead and open up this menu again, press
def and close down the terminal once
again. We should now be able to then
import the select over here. So I can
say
select and then just import that under
components UI and then for the card
content we can just import that as well.
The value of this select will then be
the selected
genome from the use state up here. So
this will store what selected what
genome is selected on the value change.
What we'll do is just call a function
called handle genome change which we
haven't implemented
yet. And the reason we will call this
function instead of just calling the set
select genome from the use state is
because we might want to do some other
state changes as well. whenever genome
is selected. So scrolling up here, I'll
just create a new function handle genome
change. This will just accept a value
string like that. And then we can say
set selected genome for now and just set
the selected genome to the
value. Scrolling back down, this select
should be disabled if we are loading. So
disabled if is loading. And if this is
loading will be set whenever the genomes
are being fetched. So obviously you
shouldn't be able to pick between
different genomes when they aren't even
fetched yet. So that is kind of the the
logic behind this disabled
functionality. Then if I just save over
here and refresh the page over here, we
should be able to see a select in just a
second. So first I'll just put in a
select trigger. So I'll say
select
trigger. Inside the select trigger, I'll
then put in a
select value from components UI select
as well. This will also need to be
imported from components UI select. The
select value should then have a
placeholder. So I'll say
placeholder select genome
assembly and I'll press save. And then
for the select trigger, I'll give it the
class names H9 with full border. And
then for the border, I'll give it
hashtag free,
C4, F3, and D. And then I'll cut it down
to 10%
opacity. And then for the actual
contents of the select, and I'll just
make this a single select value instead.
For the actual content of the select,
I'll say select content from components
UI like that. And then inside the select
content, I can go ahead and say
genomes.m map and loop through all of
our fetched genomes. So I can I can get
the genomes like
this. And then I can return a select
item. This select item should have a key
because we're inside a map. We'll just
need to import the select item. The key
should then be the
genome. It will need to be genome. It
will be genome ID. The value of this
select item will be the genome id as
well. And then for formatting how it
should look, we can go ahead and say
genome do ID and then
dash
genome.name like this. Press save. So
now you see what this looks like as well
as I'll just copy this and then down
below I'll say
genome active.
If it is
active, then what I'll do is say
uh
active otherwise I'll just put in an
empty string. So now you can see that
these ones are all active. So that is
great. Right below the select down here,
I'll just put in a conditional and then
we can show the source name. So I'll say
selected
genome and if a genome is selected, I'll
just return a paragraph. This paragraph
should say the source name. So, I'll
just say source name for now. And then
for the formatting, I'll go ahead and
say class name MT2 text extra small
text. And then # free. I can then say
C4 F3 and D. And then I can make it 60%
opacity like this. And we can then find
the genome for the genome that has been
actively selected as well. So what we'll
do is just copy this line. Then say
genomes do find and then we can say
genome like this
where genome do id is equal to selected
genome and then we can say dot we go
ahead and say source
name. So I'll just go ahead and paste
this back in and then copy this entire
thing and paste it in instead of source
name like this. then the paragraph
statement might have to be inside of
this. If I then press save, we should
then be able to see the source name just
below the picked genome. So that looks
great. And let's now just test out the
picker as well. So if I just click the
picker, we can then see that it switches
down here as it is supposed to do. And
we can then switch between these
different genomes. So it seems to
working to be working just fine. So
hopping into the excal, we can check out
what the next step is. So now we have
loaded the genome assemblies. We can
pick between genomes. So now I would
like to load the chromosomes and then
after that let the user switch between
picking genes or searching for genes and
then picking genes that are part of
specific chromosomes. So we'll just
implement the functionality right now
for just loading the chromosomes and
then hop on to this next part right
after. So the first thing I would like
to do is just hop into the genome API
file and then create a new function that
is also asynchronous that will then
fetch the chromosomes from also the UC
sen cruise API. So since we already have
the ID of the P genome we can then fetch
the chromosomes from that API as well.
So I'll start with just copying this
method right here or at least some of
it. call it
get genome
chromosomes and for the input we should
receive a genome ID that is a
string and then for the API URL we'll
need to make this a formatted string
like
this and then we'll call instead of list
USC genomes we'll say list and then
chromosomes where we pass in the query
parameter genome
equals and then we'll pass in the genome
ID and then down here we'll say fail to
fetch chromosome list from UCSC API and
then we'll follow kind of the same
structure as down here. So first we'll
check whether the chromosomes even are
within the list. So we'll just do this
and just browse chromosomes first of all
and then we'll just add the query
parameter. So, genome equals and then
we'll say
HG38 pretty print that. And now we
should be able to see what it returns.
So, if it if it doesn't return if it
doesn't contain this chromosomes key
right here. What I'll do is just say
missing chromosomes, then I'll just add
a new type up here as well. So, I'll say
export
interface chromosome from search. This
will contain a name which is a string
and also the size which is a number over
here. So those are the two things you
see right there. So I'd like to avoid
chromosomes that contains either this
underscore right here since they aren't
very telling of what the chromosome
actually is or chromosomes that contain
this un doesn't really know what that
what that is either or chromosomes that
contain random. So to do this what I'll
do is after this just say const
chromosomes which is a list of
chromosomes from search then I can say
for const chromosome
ID like this
in
chromosome and we just need to rename
this up here. So this needs to be
chromosome data. Then we can say
chromosome data
chromosomes dot And then we'll say
chromosomes. So we'll loop through all
the chromosomes. And then if the
chromosome
idinccludes and
underscore or it
includes un so I think this means
unknown or it includes random. Well in
that case we'll just
continue. Otherwise what we'll do is say
chromosome and just chromosomes.push
push and we would like to push the name
which is the chromosome ID as well as
the size and that is just going to
be chromosome data dot
chromosomes and we would like to index
in with the chromosome ID so that is the
ID right here this means we'll get out
the size and then I would like to also
just sort the chromosomes surface ID
here as well so I'll just do a natural
sort so this means that they'll come out
as chromosome one, chromosome 2, um, all
the way up to chromosome X, chromosome
Y, etc. So, I'll just do dot dot dot.
Then you can just see what what we're
doing. So, chromosomes dots sort and
we'll do a custom sorting. So, I'll say
A and B. Those are the two elements
which we'll pick between during sorting.
So, first con, we'll just check whether
A is a number and whether B is a number.
So, we'll say A.name name
dotreplace
chromosome with nothing. So we'll remove
this first chromosome part and this way
we can check whether this is a number or
not. So this is then for a and this is
for
b then we're going to say const is
number a. This will be a reg x. So I'll
say I'll go ahead and do this backslash
digits. This will then let us test
whether it is a number or not with a
simple regax. So this reg x you don't
really have to understand that much.
Just know that it checks whether this
string right here is a is only digits or
not. This then will then just be for B
instead. And for B, if is number
A and is number B is then true, then
we'll
return
number A number
minus
number B number. So if both of these are
numbers, we can then sort the
chromosomes by the difference between
the numbers. So we have one, two, etc.
So it'll just be a an increasing sort.
So in this case right here, A might be
chromosome chromosome 1 and B might be
chromosome 2. And it'll then be able to
determine that chromosome 1 comes before
chromosome 2 because both are numbers.
So we can then just take the difference.
Well, let's say A is then chromosome 1
and B is chromosome X. Well, then only
chromosome 1 will be a number and this
won't be a number. So we can say if and
then is number A. So if only A is a
number because this case will be hit up
here if both are numbers. Well, in that
case, we'll return minus
one. And this will let the sorting
sorting function know that the A element
up here should become first in the sort
order. Well, if it is the opposite case.
So, if B is a number and A is not a
number, then we'll let it know that B
should become should come first in the
sort order. But if it is comparing then
also chromosome X with chromosome Y,
well, that is another case for itself.
So, in that case, we'll just compare
them lex lexically. So alphabetically
this will mean that X will come before
Y. So in this case we'll say a number
local
compare and we'll compare it to B number
right here. Then we can go ahead and
just
return the chromosomes like this in the
sorted order. And then hopping back here
we should be able to scroll up and then
fetch those chromosomes whenever a
genome has been selected. So we'll
create a new use effect and then
whenever one of these genomes is
selected this will then rerender the
component and fetch the genomes or sorry
the chromosomes. So this should only
happen when selected genome changes up
here and then this will instead be fetch
chromosomes. We'll call this fetch
chromosomes as well. Here it'll be get
available
chromosomes. We'll import that. Let me
just see if we named it correctly. get
genome chromosomes. We'll pass in the
selected genome. This will be fail to
load chromosome data. The result of this
should then let me just import that this
this result of this get genome
chromosomes should then be stored in a
use state up here. So I'll say const
chromosomes and then set
chromosomes is equal to use state and
the use state should be chromosome from
search and array of
those and then I can also say selected
chromosome so I'll just copy this up
here call it selected chromosome set
selected chromosome as well and then
this will also just be a string string
and this will just be CR A1 for default.
So the following chromosome right here
to just the the first one and up here I
can then just import chromosome from
search correctly by appending type or
prepending type to the import statement.
I'll then say whenever this these
chromosomes has been fetched I'll then
just set the chromosomes to data.
chromosomes. What I'll then also do is
say if data chromosomes.length
length is more than zero which it'll
always be basically but just to make
sure I'll then say set selected
chromosome to data dot chromosomes the
first element dot
name so if I remove this exclamation
mark right here this might be undefined
but we know that it won't be undefined
since we have checked that the length of
the list is more than zero but the
typescript compiler doesn't quite pick
that up so that is why we put in the
exclamation mark and this should then
fetch the chromosomes whenever the
genome changes. So what I can do is just
say console.log and just log the data.
chromosomes and then hopping over to our
application and just
refreshing. If I then do select a
specific genome like this, then it
selects the chromosomes for that genome
assembly. So maybe this one as well.
Then selects genomes
still. So it has the name and size just
like we wanted it to be. So the
chromosome fetching logic seems to be
working out just fine. So now we can
move on. So hopping back into the
escaladraw, we can just check out the
next logic. So we need to be able to
search genes manually with a search
query or search for genes in specific
chromosomes by clicking specific
chromosomes for example from the ones
that we have just fetched. So what I
want to do is just use the tabs
component within chaten right here. So
I'll just find tabs. Then there should
be two different options. There should
be a search option, then a chromosomes
picker option. So, first I'll start out
by just installing the tabs. So, I'll
open up a new terminal, install tabs,
and whenever this is done, I'll then go
ahead and restart the development
server. So, I'll open up files again,
click
defaf, and then just close down the
terminal once again. And then I'll hop
back into my application and also scroll
up and then under selected chromosomes,
I would like to add a new use state. And
this is for the search query. So, if the
user decides to click this search query
tab, then the user should be able to
enter in their search query. And this
should obviously be stored somewhere.
So, we'll store this in a use state. So
I'll say search query and then set
search
query equals use
states and this will just be a string
and I'll just set it as an empty string
for now. And then scrolling down to
right beneath the card we have right
here I should be able to put in another
card. So I'll say card and then I'll say
class name MT6 a gap of zero border none
bg white py zero shadow small then I'll
save
that and just open up the card. Inside
the card I'll put in a card header. The
card header should contain a card
title like this. The card title should
be
browse. And I'll just refresh over here
just to make sure that we can follow the
progress. So now we see browse. The card
header, we then just need to put in some
class names. Padding top four, padding
bottom two. So it looks like this. For
the card title, I'll say class name text
small font normal. And then text with
the styling
um hashtag free F or free C
4F and then F free D at 77% opacity like
this. And I just put in one F too much.
So if I go ahead and remove that one F,
it'll look exactly like the card title
up here as well. Then for the card
content itself, I'll say card content
and the card content should contain the
tabs. So first I'll just say class name
padding bottom four. Then I'll say taps
which we just installed from components
UI. Inside the tabs there'll be a tabs
list. Inside the tabs list there will be
a tabs trigger.
And inside the tabs trigger, it'll say
search genes. So that is one tab we have
right here. And then I'll just need to
create a use state for storing the state
of the tab that is currently active. So
scrolling all the way up here, I'll just
say const and then mode set mode equals
use state and then we'll just create a
new type called mode. So up here I'll
say type mode equals either browse
or search like this. So I'll then say
mode and then the mode should be
search. Scrolling back down if I hop
into tabs. So in here we can set the
value to the mode. So that is the use
states and on value change what we'll do
is just grab the value and then say
switch mode and we'll just need to
create a function for that. So scrolling
all the way up right here, we can just
say const
switch mode equals and then we'll accept
a new mode which is of type
mode. And then if the new mode is equal
to the current mode, we'll just return
because we can't really switch to the
mode we're currently on already.
Otherwise, we'll just set the mode to
the new mode like this.
Then scrolling back down, we can then
use this switch mode function where we
pass in the value as a mode which it
always will be. Then for the tabs list,
we'll say class name margin bottom fall
bg
hashtag. Let me just finish like this.
Then it'll be hashtag e9
ea. And for the tabs trigger, I'll say
value. the value will be search. So this
value right here is what will be the
following value right here when the
value does change. So since this value
is search which is one of the two
options in search in in mode right here
it'll then always also be either search
or mode. So that is why we can say s
search right here. We just need to make
sure that with the other tabs trigger as
well the other tabs trigger need to say
browse and not anything else than browse
or search. So I'll also change the
styling a little bit based on the um
active state. So I'll say data and then
states equals active and then if that is
the case I'll say bgt white. I'll also
say
state I'll also say data and then state
um active. Again, if this is the case,
I'll then say text and then I'll change
the text just a little bit to free or
sorry, # free C for ref and then 3D like
this. Then I'll just copy this tabs
trigger and right below I'll
say
browse
chromosomes and then right here this
value will then be browse in step. So
it'll look like this.
Then for the tabs content, we'll first
of all have a tabs content for the
search. So I'll say tabs tabs content
value will be search. The class name is
going to be empty zero like this. Inside
this there will be a search bar where
the user can search and then also a
button to actually do the search. So
I'll start by putting in a diff. I'll
then say class name space y form. Inside
this I'll put in a form. In the form,
I'll have an
onsubmit. This will contain a method for
actually doing the searching. I'll just
put in a empty method for now. So,
outside of this, sorry, outside this
onsit, I'll just put in a class name say
flex flex column gap of free between the
items vertically small. So, on large
screens, flex
row cool. And then inside the form, I
would like to put in another div. I'll
give it the classes relative and flex
one. Inside this, I'll put in an input.
The input we'll get from chaten. So,
we'll just hop back into chaten, find
the input over
here, right there, and just install that
input. So, I'll open up the terminal,
install the input, and just restart the
uh development server right after that.
So, that is what I'm doing right here.
And then I should be able to refresh
over
here. And now we should see still see
the input server or sorry the
development server running. This input
will then be of type text. So I'll say
type text. The placeholder is going to
be I'll just close it and also just
import that. The placeholder is going to
be enter gene symbol or name. Under this
placeholder I'll put in a value of type
search
query. So going up here we can just see
whatever what we call this. So search
query. So I'll just put that in and then
we can see on change. We'll then say
we'll receive the event and then set
search query to
event.target value. And then we'll also
just style it a little bit. class name
H9
border of a hashtag
3C4F and then
3D style down or scaled down to 10%
opacity and then a PR PR of 10. Then
what we can then do is put in a button
into this. So I'll say button from
components UI as well. We'll put a
search icon into the button. So I'll say
search like this and then just close
that. Give it the class name H4 with
four along with a span. And this span
should just say search like this. And I
just made a small mistake. We just need
to close down the input right there. And
now we see this and that. And then for
the button I'll put on some classes.
Absolutes. I'll put on top zero right
zero age full cursor pointer rounded
large none or sorry left none background
hashtag free and I'll just use the same
one as right
here like that I'll put on text white
and then hover in that case I'll say
background put on the same one again and
then just scale it down to 90% opacity
and then I'll make sure this button
right here is disabled if so I'll say
disabled if is
loading or there is nothing in the
search query so if not search
querytrim and the size of this button
should then just be
icon like that and then we should have a
type which is going to be submit then
this search text right here will just go
ahead and set to screen reader only. So
I'll just say is our only and then it'll
be the button right sorry the icon right
here. So if I insert something into this
we should be able to see the button. So
it won't really do anything now because
we haven't made it do anything when the
form is submitted but we at least able
to use the search input field. And then
I just want to make the user able to
load in an example. So this should just
set the input or sorry the input field
search query for the user. So this
button will say try
BRCA1 example like this. And then we'll
just style the button to
uh be
variant variant um link like this. And
then for the class name we'll say h auto
cursor
pointer padding of zero text and we
would like an orange text. So we'll say
hashtagde
8246 and then we'll just copy this color
right here and then say on hover then
we'll change the
text to become this just with 80%
opacity instead. So it look like
this and then we'll just create a method
for handling actually clicking the
button. So hopping up here we can say
const load BRCA1 example
equals a new method where we say set
mode. So we set the mode to
search because you can't really click
chromosomes and then load this BCA
example which is a specific gene. This
specific example by searching for this
BSA1 gene only makes sense if you are on
the set or search genes tab. So after
this, I'll then say set search query to
BCA 1. So it'll just search for this for
the user. And then we of course just
need to handle the actual searching. We
haven't really implemented that yet. So
we'll just leave a comment about that
for now. Going down to the button again,
we should just put in an on click. So on
click, we'll then just call this method
right here. So clicking it, it then just
sets this BA1. And then we can actually
go ahead and search for that. We'll just
create another method up here as well.
So if I scroll up, then I can say const
handle search. And this is equal to an
async function that takes a react event.
So
react form event. Then we'll say if
event default. So this is what we'll
call whenever we submit the form. Then
we'll say if not search query.trim
trim. So if there is no content in the
search query field right here, then
we'll go ahead and say
return and we're just missing the rocket
notation to make sure it's actually a
function. And then when this has been
done, so we have extracted the search
query or sorry made sure that we have a
search query that actually exists. Then
we can do the search gene search
actually. So we'll say perform gene
search which we'll do do in just a
second after having implemented the tab
content for the browse chromosomes as
well. But for now I can just take this
handle search and scroll down to the
form which we defined right here and
then just pass that in as as the handle
search for the onsubmit. And then for
this handle search we can actually also
just call it up here. So we'll go ahead
and do this and then just make this
react form event optional because we
check for whether the event is there or
not anyways. And then for the tabs
content under the browse chromosomes
menu right here. We need to implement
that as well. So we can just scroll down
to tabs content. I'll just copy this
right
here and then paste it in. And then this
should be browse instead because we
browse different chromosomes. And then I
would like a list of chromosome buttons.
So, first I'll put in a div and I'll say
class name max height 150 pixels like
that. Then I'll say overflow y auto PR1
and then put in a diff that actually
wraps around the oh div and then the
class name should be flex and flex wrap
and this will wrap the buttons around.
So if there are more buttons than the
screen with allows then they'll wrap to
the next line. So I can then say gap 2
under this I'll say
chromosomes dom and I'll get the
chromosome out like this and then for
each chromosome I would like to render
out a
button. So I can do a button like that
and then for the button the content. So
the text should be
chromosomeame. So these are then all the
chromosomes we can pick between. Then
for the key, because we need to set a
key when we're inside this map function,
we'll say
chromosome.name because they'll be
unique. It wouldn't make sense for each
of these buttons or for any of these
buttons for that sake to have the same
chromosome anyways. Cool. So after the
key, we can say variant and then
outline like that. Then we can say size
small. We can then say save. Then we can
put in a class name. The class name
should
be a class name that allows for
optionals like this. We'll then say
height of eight cursor pointer. We'll
put in a border with this color right
here. So I'll say
border put in the color at opacity 10
10%. and then hover. In that case, we
say
background E9 E A and then we'll say
hover and then text and then just put in
the background color once again. So that
will look like this. And then when you
do hover it, you see the background
color changes and cool. Then for the
optional, what we'll do is say if there
is a selected chromosome that is equal
to the
chromosome.name. So chrome.name name. So
the one that is currently selected will
highlight in some way. So if that is the
case, we'll then say background color
# E9
EA and
text in the color we always
use. Otherwise, we'll put in an
empty string like this. So this one is
currently selected. Then you can click
another one. We can't do that right now.
We need to actually put in the on click.
So I'll just say on click set selected
chromosome and then I'll just select
chromosome.name like that. So when I
click one over here now we should be
able to select different ones like we
are. So that is great and you can see
which one is selected. So it seems to to
be working out just fine. Then we can
just put in an error state and also a
loading state now. So if we just set
error
to null or test error and we set is
loading to true, we can now just put in
those two states under these cards or
sorry under these tabs. So this global
loading state both for searching for the
genes but also for loading the genome
assemblies should just be shown in this
card right here which is kind of the
main card on the page. So under the tabs
I'll say is loading. If we are loading,
so if is loading is true, then we'll
return a div. This should have the class
name flex justify sensor py of four.
Inside this, we'll put in another div.
I'll just save this. And this should
just be an empty div, but we'll put in
some classes that makes it a spinner.
So, height of six, width of six, animate
spin. This comes from tailwind, by the
way. Rounded full border two.
border we'll put in the same color at
30% opacity and then a border top of and
this will be an orange color so de 82
46 and I'll just need to make this a
color and then I think this is loading
state was overridden somehow by set is
loading up here maybe so I'll just go
ahead and remove the statements setting
it to false and just reload over here
and Now we see the loading state that
just spins around like this. So that
seems to be working just fine. Now if I
just save this and then up here at the
loading state I set loading to false by
default. Then if I do refresh the page
it loads for just a second whenever this
genome assembly is loading. So now the
loading state is working. We can go
ahead and create the error state. So the
error state will be a little bit like
this. So I'll say if if there is
currently an error then we'll return a
diff like that. This diff will contain
the error message. So test error and the
styling will be MT4 rounded medium
border border red
200 bg red 50 padding of three text
small text red 700. So an error that you
will see will look exactly like this.
But of course we don't need to show the
error every time. We just need to hide
it again. So it's only shown unless or
sorry if there is actually an error. So
I'll go ahead and just insert a null
again and then the error should be
gone. Okay, let's just create the
function in here for actually searching
for the different genomes. So this
function will say it'll for oh sorry for
this function we'll say export async
function and then search
genes and then we'll pass in a query
which is a string along with a genome
which we're searching within that is
also going to be a string. So this
genome we're searching within is going
to be the genome assembly that has been
chosen. And then for the API we'll be
working with, we'll say const url equals
https and then we'll say
clinical
tables dot
nlm
nih.gov slash and then it's going to be
api ncbi
uh
genes version 3 and underscore search.
So just hopping into the base UL of this
right here, we can just check out what
it actually is we're using. So what this
is is a public database we can use to
search within genes. So what we're going
to do is use this NCBI genes right here.
So if I click that, we'll be able to see
what we need to do to actually search
between or search within these genes. So
right here it says the process data only
includes the human gene data from NCBI's
gene data set. And because we are
constraining our software to only
working with the human organism, that is
perfectly fine. It is also provided as
is and free of charge. So we can just
call this API without any problems and
without any authentication tokens as
well. For the genes you are searching
for, you can get all these filled out.
And you specify whenever you call the
API which ones of these you want and
which ones you do you do not want. So
what we'll do is hop down here to under
the URL and then say cons
params equals new URL search params.
Then we'll say
terms query. We then also say df and the
these are called display fields. So in
here we'll put chromosome. We'll also
put symbol. We'll put description. We'll
also put a map location and a type of
gene like this. Then I'll just copy this
line to right below it. And then I'll
call these EF. So for expanded fields
and then I'll also just add genomic info
and gene ID like
this. And this should allow us to
retrieve the following properties down
here or the following fields. So I can
then say con
response equals await and then fetch and
we'll then just
fetch the URL and then we'll put on the
query parameters as well. So I'll say
params and then I can say
if
not response.
Then we'll throw a new
error which will just be something like
NCBI API
error like this. And I'll just make this
inside the curl braces so it looks a
little bit nicer. This needs to be URL
for example as well. And then after
having done this fetch, we can just go
ahead and get the JSON from the
response. So I'll say con data equals
awaits response.json.
Then I can say con results. This will
have to be a type which we'll make
ourselves and this is just going to be
equal to an empty array for now. So
hopping up we can just go ahead and
define the type. So we'll say export
interface gene from search. This will be
this will contain a symbol. A symbol
will be a string. It will contain a name
that is going to be a string as well.
It'll also contain
a chromosome,
a
description as well as a gene ID and
this gene ID we can use to get more
information about the specific IG or
sorry specific gene whenever you do
click a gene and is navigated to that
page as well. So now we can say that
this list is of type gene from search in
an array. So hopping over here, if we
scroll down to the API documentation, we
can see that this is a sample API query
along with the result that we are
getting back. So right here it says
returns all five genes matching MTX. The
number five is the total amount of
amount of available result count and
that is the number five they're talking
about right here. So first we'll check
for whether we have an amount of results
coming back. Otherwise, we don't really
need to get all of these specific keys
out of the results if we aren't even
getting any results back. So I'll say if
and then data and then zero because this
was an array is uh more than zero. Well
then we'll have to get the specific
properties out. So I'll go ahead and say
con field map is equal to data
2. So over here if we just take a look
at the description we see that this is
index zero this is index one and this is
index two. So right here we can see that
the subsequent quit null null means that
no extra parameters were requested via
the EF parameter. So we actually passed
in this EF parameter right here with the
gene ID. So this null should not be null
for our request. So we should be able to
actually get this extra requested data
out of that. So that is why I say data 2
right here. Then I'll say const gene ids
is equal to field map gene id or just an
empty array. Then we can loop through
the results. So I'll create a classic
for loop for let i be zero. And then if
i is less than and I'll say math
minimum. So I'll process at max 10
different results. And if the data
contains less than 10 results, I'll just
default to that. And then I'll say I ++
or sorry plus+
I and then we can get these the display
properties. So I can say if I is less
than data
free.length but first we'll just do this
little check to just make sure the for
loop doesn't run out of bounds. So if it
the for loop runs for 10 times for
example but that there are only five
different results returned we won't
really be able to get any results out of
the last five um iterations in the
follow loop. So we just want to make
sure that we don't run out of bounds
with this little safety check. And then
again, we'll also put this into a try
catch since we don't really know that
much about the API. So we want to make
sure that we always have the props
available. So I'll say in the catch
continue. This means that if we get an
error trying to access some of these
fields, we'll just continue and skip
that specific record. Cool. So I'll then
say const display equals data free i. I
can then say let the chromosome be equal
to display zero if the chromosome and
not
chromosome like this dot starts
with
chromosome then we'll say chromosome
I'll just put this into brackets
chromosome will be equal
to chromosome
chromosome like this. So what we'll do
is if the chromosome is just a number
such as 22 for example, then we'll just
append or prepend chromosome to that
number such that it says chromosome 22
like it does right here for example. So
this is chromosome 2. So we don't want
this to just be two for example. So we
just append chromosome um to that.
Hopping back in here we then just push
these results to the results array. So
I'll say results is equal to sorry
push and then I'll push the symbol which
will be
display two. We'll push a name. This
will be
display three. We'll also push the
chromosome and a
description. So the description will be
display free again. So this will be the
same as the name. Then for the gene ID,
we'll set this to gene ids at index the
i, which we're currently at. Otherwise,
just an empty string. Then if we hop
outside this if statement right here, we
can then say
return and then
query genome and results. And then
hopping back into the page, if we just
scroll up to under this use effect at
fetch chromosomes, we'll just create a
new function called perform gene search,
which is an async function that takes a
query that is a string, a genome that is
a string. It'll also take a filter
function. So this allows us to filter
the genes, gene search results after
they have been fetched for the API. So,
how we're going to do this is by just
saying filter function. This should be
optional because we probably don't want
to use it all the time. We'll then say
gene gene from
search boolean like that. Then we'll
also just open up the function. So, I
can go ahead and say record notation
open up the function. Inside this, I'll
put in a try along with a catch.
Inside the catch, we'll just say set
error message. So we'll just use this
global error message
error like that. We can just say failed
actually
to search
genes. And then we'll just put in a
finally. Inside the finally, we'll set
is loading to
false like this. And then we'll set this
loading to true inside the try as the
first
thing like this. Cool. And then inside
this try, what we'll then do is say
const data is equal to
await search genes. We pass in the
query along with the
genome. This just needs to be written in
the correct way. After this we can then
say const results is equal to if we do
have a filter function then we apply
that. So then we say data dot
results dot filter where we pass in a
filter function. Otherwise we just say
that results is equal to data results.
Then we can just set a search results
use state. So up here we just need a use
state to store all of the search
results. So under search query I'll say
const search
results set search results is equal to
use state and this will be an array of
gene from search like
that and then if I scroll down we should
be able to just set these down
here. So right about there we can then
say set search results and set the
results like this. And when do we want
to actually perform the gene search?
Well, one of the cases is whenever a
chromosome is selected. So we'll say use
effect and just listen for selected
chromosomes. So we'll pass in that
dependency array. So we'll say selected
chromosome selected genome as well as
the mode. Then we can go ahead and say
if not selected chromosome or mode is
not browse. So this should only happen
for the chromosomes and that is when the
mode is browse. Well in these two cases
we'll just return. Then we can say
perform gene search selected chromosome
selected genome and then we can pass in
a filter function where we say gene gene
from
search where gene dot chromosome is
equal to select chromosome. Okay. is the
reason we actually passing in this
filter function into this perform gene
search with which then also filters away
genes outside the chromosome after
having performed the API search. So this
one in here is because this API call
which we perform right there performs a
broad search based on this search term
and this happens to be the chromosome
name in the browse mode. But this also
actually might return genes that aren't
actually on chromosome 7 for example if
that is what you search for. So we do
some client side filtering to make sure
that the genes that are returned are
also actually filtered to the chromosome
which was searched for to make sure that
only genes within the chromosome which
we're searching for is actually shown to
the user whenever they use that filter.
So with that out of the way, let's just
go ahead and find out where else we need
to perform the gene search. So whenever
you change the gene or sorry whenever
you handle the search down here. So that
corresponds to if we hop into the code
and then you search for something like
this and then you click right here to
search. Well, in that case we'll need to
search for genes. So we'll s we'll call
perform gene search pass in the search
query as well as the
selected genome like that. And then
whenever you click this browse
chromosome I also want it to search for
genes because this chromosome one is
automatically selected. It doesn't
really make sense that you have to
select a chromosome before anything even
pops up. This should just search for
genes automatically such that you can
see the results for chromosome 1. So
I'll hop down to switch mode that is
actually up here. So whenever the user
switches the mode, I would like to first
of all immediately clear the search
results. So set search results. I I'll
immediately clear that list to make sure
the user doesn't see any search results
from the other pane for example. And
then I can also say set error and also
clear that because now it is a new
browser or sorry a new way of browsing.
So if you here and you switch to this
you don't want to see the error from
this search genes pane for example. So
we'll just clear those two and then
we'll say if new mode is equal to
browse and select chromosome is actually
there. Then we'll say
perform gene search. And we'll just copy
the exact same thing from up here. So
that it will be these four
lines. And I'll paste these in right
there. And then if we hop into perform
gene search and just print out the
results,
console.log
results. Hop over here. Refresh the
page. And I'll just open up the console
like that. And then we can try and load
the BICA1 example and press search. And
now we see these genes that were
searched for. If I click browse
chromosomes, they also load
automatically. And when I switch, they
also load automatically. So all that
there's left to do now is just show the
genes. So I'll just close down the
terminal and then scroll down
again all the way down to below this
error. And then I can say search results
dot oh search results dotlength is more
than zero. So if any search results are
there and we are not
loading then we'll
say and like this. This just needs to be
put in a
parenthesis. Then we'll return a
div. This div should have the class name
MT6. Inside this div, I'll just put
another
one. This div should have the class name
margin bottom
uh two. Inside here, I'll then put in an
h4 and say if the mode is equal to
search, then
we'll return a rack
fragment. Otherwise, we'll just return
another rack fragment like that.
And then inside the rack fragment, we'll
say search
results. Put in a forced spacing like
that. And I'll then just write out how
many search results were found. So I'll
say search uh
results dot
length. And then I'll say
jeans. Save that. And then we can just
format this a little bit. I'll just
refresh over here to make sure that we
actually see what we're supposed to see.
So, if I just load this BC1 example and
press search, we can now see search
results. Seven genes for the H4. We'll
then say text extra
small. We'll say font
normal and we'll just say text
#
3C 4f. And then we'll say 3D at 70%
opacity like this. And then we'll just
take this text and copy it. Hop down
into the span. Say class name font
medium. Paste this in again. And just
remove this opacity. So now it'll look
like this. So this was for the search.
Then I'll just copy this right there.
Paste it down into what happens if we in
browse mode. So if we're looking for
chromosomes. So we'll say genes on and
then we'll show the selected chromosome.
So selected chromosome and then I'll say
found right here instead. So hopping
into browse chromosomes genes on
chromosome one seven found. Then I would
like to show a table with all of the
different um genes. So, first I'll hop
into shad cnen. Just find the table
component, that one right here, and just
install
that terminal, new
terminal, and then just restart the
development server just because we added
new
files. Close down this terminal again.
And then we should be able to first put
in a div. This will just serve as a
container for the table. Making sure
that it doesn't overflow in the screen,
for example. So I'll say class
overflow hidden rounded MD border and
then a border color of um
3C 4F 3D like that at only 5%
opacity. So hopping back in here we
should be able to
refresh and then just search for
something. And now we see this border
right here. So in here I can just open
up a new table element. So I'll say
table from components UI table. And then
into inside here I'll put in a table
header first of all. This table header
should be table header and table header
right there. And I I'll import those.
Then I'll say table
row. The table row should have
a table head. Inside the table head,
we'll have the symbol. First of all,
we'll also have let me just style this
first before copying it. So, I'll say
class name text extra small font normal
as well as text and then just the same
text as up
here. So, I'll paste this
in at 70% opacity.
Then I'll just take this table head and
copy it twice and call this name and
this location. So now we have symbol
name and location for each gene. Then
for the table row styling itself we'll
just say class name BG and then we'll
say E 9 E A at 50%. Then we'll say hover
BG. And then we'll do the same but just
cut it down or sorry increase the
opacity a little bit. So maybe like
70. And then for the table body itself.
So
table body inside this. Oh, I just made
a spelling error. Table body. Inside
this we can go ahead and say search
results dot and then we can say map and
then we can get each gene and the genes
index and then render out the different
table rows. So I'll
say table row. Inside here I'll put in a
key. The key for the table row should be
a string consisting of a gene dot symbol
just to make it unique. So we'll make it
consist of both the gene dos symbol as
well as the index like this. And then
for the table row we can then
say table cell. Inside this table cell,
we'll put in the gene
um
symbol like
that. Import the table cell and then I
can say class name py2 font medium and
text giving it the same color
again. I'll then just try and search for
a gene. So now we can at least see the
name cell. Then I'll just take the table
cell and copy it twice. This one will
then just be name. This one will be
chromosome. So now we see the different
results like this. Then for the styling
of the table row, I'll say class name
cursor pointer border bottom and then
also a
border color. So the border color is
going to be a little bit darker gray. So
I'll say hashtag 3C
4F 3D add five and then we'll say hover
background
#
E9 EA at 50 like this. So when we do
hover it, it tells us that they're able
to actually click these. So now we just
need to be able to click them. So
hopping up here, you obviously need to
be able to select a gene. So I'll just
create a new one here called
uh const
selected gene and then set selected
gene. This will just be a use state
containing
a gene from search or null if there
isn't anyone selected. Then I can just
say null for default value. Scroll all
the way down again and then inside the
table row we can then just define an on
click and then on click will then just
set the gene. So we'll
say
set selected gene and then just pass in
the gene like that. We will also just
set the selected gene up here in the
handle genome change. So, if I just find
that right here, then we'll also just
set both the search results to an empty
array as well as setting the selected
gene to null. So, whenever you select a
new genome assembly up here, it should
just reset the entire state down here.
So, delete what is right here or sorry,
delete the search results that have
currently been there for a previous
genome assembly as well as well as a
gene that you might have selected
before. And when you switch your mode
down here, we might as well also want to
set the selected gene to null. Since the
only reason you would actually switch
the tabs up here would be to select the
new gene anyways. Now we can just
implement a state that shows the user
that no genes were found on this
chromosome for example if no genes were
found during the search. So down here
we'll just say if not is loading and if
not
error and search
results
dotlength is equal to zero and then
we'll return some HTML. So this will be
a diff. Inside here we'll first of all
put in a search logo. So we'll just say
search like that.
So let's say we just put in something
that definitely isn't found like
this. Then just um save over here. Well,
that is what we see now. So, under this
search logo right here, I'll put in a
paragraph saying if you are
in mode
search, in that case, what we'll do is
say enter a gene or symbol and click
search.
Otherwise, what we'll do is say if you
have a selected
chromosome, then we'll say no genes
found on this
chromosome. Otherwise, we'll say select
a
chromosome to view
genes. Cool. And then obviously this
looks terrible, so we'll just go ahead
and format that. So we'll say class name
flex height of 40 48 like this flex
column items center justify center to
center
everything text center as
well and text gray 400 like this. Then
for the search logo itself we'll say
margin bottom four age 10. We'll say
width of 10 as well and text gray 300
for the paragraph right here. We'll then
say text small and leading relaxed. And
this should make everything look much
better like you see right here. So this
is what you see. So if I just refresh
the
page, insert gene or symbol and click
search. So that is what has been
triggered right here. Then if I click
browse chromosomes, then maybe we can
find a chromosome that doesn't contain
anything. This one chromosome M. No
genes found on this chromosome that is
triggered by the following string right
here. So this if condition hopping back
into search genes. If we just search for
something, this works fine. If I put in
a bunch of stuff that doesn't make
sense, then we just see the empty state
again like we see right here. So right
now when I click this try B1 example, it
does fill in the search um field for me.
But I would like to also have it do the
searching for me such it such that it
actually fulfills the entire promise of
trying out this BS1 example. So instead
of calling handle search right here,
I'll just call perform search gene auto
manually like this. And then for the
search query, this is just going to be
BRCA1. And then for the selected genome,
that won't really change. So if I now
click, it should then do the entire
thing for me. So that is exactly what I
was looking for. Perfect. And then
lastly, whenever a gene has been
selected, I would like to go ahead and
show a page for that specific gene,
instead of showing all of this. So into
the main right here, I'll just put in a
conditional and I'll say if there is a
selected gene, then I'll say H1 and then
select
gene. And then I'll just
say selected gene like this. Otherwise,
what I'll do is just return all this
below. And this will have to be within a
react fragment. So right here, we also
need to say selected gene dot something
like name. And then I'll just take
everything from the bottom right above
main right here and all the way
up until this card. P. Copy that. And
then I'll put this inside this rack
fragment and press save. Now when I
refresh over here, what I would like to
see is that when we do select a gene, we
then just see selected gene and then we
can render out the entire page for that
specific selected gene on this page you
see right here. So that is the expected
behavior and that is also what we
see. Now one thing I do notice over here
is that it says select chromosome twice.
it is actually supposed to be selected
genome such that this code is only being
run if any of these changes and
obviously you don't need to put in
select the chromosome twi twice. So I'll
just save that and then we'll be ready
to build out this component instead of
the hardcoded text right here. And this
component we'll do under the components
folder. So I'll say new file and then
I'll call this gene viewer
tsx. In here I'll create a new
component. So I'll say export
defaults function and then I'll call
this gene
viewer. I'll pass in a gene as well as
the genome ID as well as an on close. So
whenever you do go back from that page
well what happens then that is what we
need to define here. I'll just open it
up like this and say gene is
a gene from
search and then a genome ID is going to
be a string. So that'll be genome
ID like this. That'll be a string. And
lastly on close will just be a function
that returns
void. Cool. And in here I'll just first
of all return an H1 and then just uh say
gene.name again. So if I take gene
viewer and paste it in right here
instead, we can now import that. So I'll
add the import say we'll pass down the
gene that is will be the selected gene.
We'll pass down the genome ID that will
be the selected genome. We'll also pass
down the on close. So what happens when
you go back to this to this general page
or the first page from that um gene
page? Well in that case we'll set the
selected gene to null. So I'll say set
selected gene and set that to null. This
way, whenever you click the back button
inside the gene viewer, it will set the
selected gene to null and then stop
rendering this page right here and
instead go back to this page down here.
So, if I go back here and then just try
out this example, click a gene. Now, we
can see the exact same thing. And then
we just need to implement the back
button inside the gene viewer. So, the
first thing I'll do is just change out
this H1 for a div. Inside this div, I'll
say class name space Y6 because we'll
have multiple items inside this div.
I'll then put in a button from chaten.
Inside this button, I'll say back to
results. I'll also just put in an arrow
left icon. So I'll say arrow left from
Lucid React with the class names MR2 H4
and then with four. The MR2 is to just
distance just a little bit from the text
right here. Cool. Then I can go ahead
and say class
names. Um, let me just put on a variant
first actually. Variant and then ghost.
And then over here I'll just refresh and
hop into a gene. So I'll click this and
hop into a specific gene. And then I can
see back to results. Now for the class
name I'll actually make it small as
well. So I'll just say size small. And
then for the class names I'll put on
cursor pointer. And before I save, let
me just show you why. So right now when
I hover over here you can see that the
cursor just stays the same. When I save
here and then hover now you can see that
it is more visible to the user that this
button is clickable. Then I can just put
on a text color as
well. This will be the usual one of
hashtag 3C 4 and then 3D again. And then
for the hover effect I would like to put
on the background color of free and then
9 e. Oh, sorry. E 9 E E and then A at
70%. And then when I hover it, it looks
like this. And when I do go ahead and
click it, I'll be taken back. Oh, we
just need to implement that. So, we'll
just say uncclick. And then we'll call
the on close, which will rest, sorry,
clear the state of the selected gene in
the parenting component. So, it'll call
this uh function right here, pass down.
Now, now when I click it, we should be
able to navigate back and forth between
these two
pages. So, what I would like to do is
that since we have a specific component
for a specific gene and then we pass
down the gene as well as the genome ID,
whenever you do click a gene, it should
then load the data for that specific
gene within this child component gene
viewer. And then we can show specific
information about okay, what nucleotides
in this is inside this gene as well as
what is the gene called and more
information about the gene itself. And
you should also be able to just create a
mutation and test it out with the back
end that we deployed on model. The first
thing I would like to build inside this
empty page is a card that shows
information about the specific gene. So
this will basically be the simplest
feature of the page. So what we'll do is
just fetch some data about the gene
because we have the gene ID right here.
So we can say gene and then dot gene ID.
So to fetch the gene details, we'll
scroll all the way down and then create
a new function. So we'll say
export
asynchronous function. This will be
called
fetch gene details. It will accept a
gene ID of type string and return a
promise. This promise will contain gene
details of type. We'll just say any, but
I'll define it in just a second. Gene
bounce. This will also be a type I'll
define in a second. I'll just say any
for now. and then an initial range and
this will be a type containing a start
which is a number and an end which is
also a number. This can
also be
null like that. Then I'll just go ahead
and open up the method and then define
these types. So scrolling all the way up
the gene bounds will be pretty simple.
It is going to
be a I'll say interface and then gene
bounce. It'll be a pretty simple
interface just with a minimum which is a
number as well as a maximum which is
also going to be a number. So I'll just
spell this correctly. And then we'll
also define the interface for the gene
details. So gene
details from search like this. And this
will contain a couple of props. So first
of all we'll have
genomic info which is optional. Then we
will have where the gene is placed on
the chromosome. This will be called
chromosome starts and that is a number.
So remember a entire DNA genome or the
entire genome is broken down into
chromosomes and then specific genes are
placed on these chromosomes. So genes
will have a start position and an end
position in the chromosome. So we'll
have a chromosome start and also a
chromosome stop. Then we'll also have a
strand. So I'll say strand, make that
optional, and then just make that a
string. And the API can then also return
multiple genomic info per gene. So we'll
just make that an array. The API can
then return a summary. This is going to
be a string. It can also return the
organism. So that will be a dictionary
like this with a scan tific name of a
string as well as a common name which is
also a string. And then scrolling down
we can go ahead and use these. So I'll
go all the way down and then the gene
details will be gene gene details from
search or null. And the gene bounds will
then be the
gene
bounce or null as well. And then the
reason it's complaining is because we
aren't returning a promise of this type
right now. So first I'll just say try
and then I'll say catch and then error.
And then if an error happens, we'll then
just say
return gene
details as null gene bounds as null as
well as initial range as null like that.
Inside the API, we would like to first
define the detail URL. So I'll say
detail URL equals and I'll make this a
formatted string because we need to pass
in the gene ID to the URL. So I I'll do
this
https and then it'll be e
utils.ncpi nlm.
Nih.go
government. And then I can just take
this URL paste it into my browser and
this will give you all the documentation
for actually using the endpoints. These
documentations are quite old and not
very nice to work with. So that is why I
just defined the type up here and that
is because I've worked with with it
before. So I kind of know what it will
return. But if you need any more
documentation and want to expand on what
we're building, you can go ahead and
head to this URL right here. Then check
out the full
documentation. So after this, I'll then
say slash
entress slash
um e
utils slash and this is e utils not u e
utils. So like that. And then I can say
e summary
um
fc gi and then I'll put on the cur
parameters. source a database we're
looking in is going to be the gene
database and this will be equal to
and the ID we're looking for is going to
be this one gene ID and we'll then say
red mode equals JSON and save that and
now we have the full fetch URL down so
we can go ahead and say const detail
response equals a weight fetch detail
URL then we can say If not detail
response. Then we'll return the same as
down
here. And then also just say console dot
error and then something like fail to
fetch gene
details as well as the error message. So
something like I just need to make this
a formatted
string like that. And then I can say
detail response dot status text. Now
when it does succeed, which it probably
will do hopefully, we can say const
detail data equals a weights detail
response. JSON and then convert it to
JSON format. Then we can say if detail
data do
results and detail data dot
results gene
ID. Then what we'll do is then copy this
right here and say const the details for
this gene is going to be the contents of
this dictionary value right here. Then
I'll say
if detail dot genomic
info and detail dot and we'll do genomic
info again. Length is larger than zero.
We'll then say const info equals delt
genomic
info index zero because remember this
genomic info up here could be could have
be an array because the API might return
multiple genomic infos per gene. So
we'll just take the first one and now we
can then grab the position of the gene
on the chromosome. So genes can then
either be on a positive or a negative
DNA strand. So if the gene is on the
positive strand then chromosome start
will typically be less than chromosome
stop. But if the gene is on the negative
strand then chromosome start might be
greater than chromosome stop. And I want
the chromosome start to always be the
smallest one. So therefore we'll say
const minimum position equals math
dominimum. And then I'll say info
chromosome starts and info.
chromosome stop like this. And then for
the maximum position that will then be
the exact same. And this will then
always be the chromosome start. And this
will always be the chromosome stop. So I
can then say const bounce equals minimum
minus and maximum is
max. And then down here we can say
return a dictionary with gene detail.
This will then be detail. We can then
also return the gene bounce which will
be the
bounce and I would also like to return
one more thing and I'll just call this
details. So the last thing is the
initial range up here. So later on we'll
build another card that is not this gene
viewer or sorry that is not this gene
details card but instead another card
also shown within the gene viewer and
this card will show the entire sequence
or part of the sequence if it is a
massive sequence of the gene that we're
currently working with. So if we're
working with a massive sequence, I would
like to only show 10,000 nucleotides
within this gene. And if the gene is
less than 10,000 nucleotides, we can
just go ahead and show the entire gene.
So this initial range up here is going
to be the range from and to which the
nucleotide sequence should be fetched
from in this other card. So to calculate
this se this uh initial um range, the
first thing I'll do is say const gene
size get that. This will then be max
position minus the minimum position. We
can then get the sequence start. So the
sequence start will simply be equal to
minimum
position. And then the sequence end. So
sequence end will then be dependent on
whether the gene size is above the
10,000 or not. So I'll say gene size is
more than 10,000. If that is the case,
then the sequence end will be minimum
position plus and then
10,000. Otherwise, it'll just be max
position. So, we'll go ahead and limit
it. So, max position and the range down
here will then just be start sequence
start and the end will then just
be sequence
end. And then the initial range will
then just be range like this. And then
we're missing a return statement down
here in case this if statement isn't
true. So what we're going to do is just
take this right here in case no genomic
data was found. And then then just
return that. That should also clear away
the error you just saw up here. And now
we can hop back into the gene viewer. So
on load we'll just run a use effect
that'll go ahead and call this method.
So I'll say
um use
effect. And this use effect should shall
be ran on initialization. So I'll say
gene and then genome ID. So it'll only
depend on these two. So it'll run when
the component is first rendered. And if
these were to change and then the thing
that is returned or the result that is
returned from this function right here,
we can just store some use states as
well. So we can show it. So first I'll
say const and then
gene detail and then set gene detail.
This will then be equal to a use state
that is a gene
details from
scratch. So let me just see if
we exported
that. It does not seem like we did that.
So I'll just scroll
up. So maybe I just have to fix some
bugs here. And then this will just be
null as the default value. And this can
then also be
null. And now we are able to import it
along with the use state. This just has
to be a client component now because
we're using states within the component.
And then just like we did inside this
page, I also want a loading state and as
well as an error. So I'll just copy
these two right here into the gene
viewer like that. And then for the
initial range, I would like to just keep
your states for those two. So that uh
that is the start and end position will
also return right here. So I'll say
const and
then start position and I can then
say set start position and that'll just
be equal to a use
state that can then be a string for now.
So I'll just say string and make this an
empty string right now. So this will be
an input field where the user can enter
a string and then the string will be
interpreted as a number and this will
then of course throw an error if it is
not a number. So I can then say end
position and set end position just so we
can set these from the initial range.
Good. So in this use effect we can go
ahead and call the new method we created
in genome API. So first I'll say const
initialize gene data is equal to an
async
function and then down here I can say
initialize gene data like that. And then
of course we need to set the is
loading to
true. We need to set an error to null.
So set
error to null. So we'll basically just
reset all of these states. So, I'll also
just set the gene
detail to null as well as the start
position to an empty string. And I'll do
the same for the end
position. This just means we have a
clean slate to work with. And then if I
say gene gene ID and then hover
this, this might actually be null. So
right now it is not optional, but it
might actually be undefined. So I'll
just go ahead and fix that bug right
there. So if the gene ID is not returned
from the API where we fetch it from,
we'll then say if
not gene gene ID. So if the gene ID is
missing, we'll then say set error and
the error will be set to gene ID is
missing. Cannot fetch details like that.
And then we'll also set is loading to
false. We can actually just do that
inside the finally. Oh wait, that won't
even be run. So what we'll do is just
say set is loading to false because we
started it up here. And then we'll just
return and then don't run any of the
code below this right here. And next up
we can say try and we can say catch. And
then we can say set error inside this
catch and say fail to load gene
information. Please try
again like that. And then we can also
create a finally that is run a either
way. And then we can say set is loading
to false. And then inside this try we'll
then say const results is equal to a
weight
API or just fetch detail. So fetch gene
details and we'll pass in the gene.
ID like this. And then what we get back
is the gene details, gene bounds and
also initial range. So I'll say I'll
just dstructure this right away. So gene
details gene bounds as well as the
initial range. And then we can go ahead
and say set gene detail. This will be
gene details. Then we can
say set gene
bounce which we just need to create a
use state for as well. So I'll hop up
here and then
say const gene bounce and set gene
bounce is equal to use
state
gene
bounce or null. And then we'll just set
this to null per default. And then down
here we can now say set gene bounce and
pass in the gene bounce.
Then we can go ahead and say if we have
the gene bounds right there. Then what
we'll do or this is actually the initial
range. If we have the initial range then
I'll say set start position to a string.
We convert the initial range start. And
then we can also set the end position
where we say initial range dot end like
that. And then we just need to fetch the
gene
sequence. And we might as well just go
ahead and create that now. So hopping
into genome API up here. I see we need
to just type here though. So hopping
into the genome API, we can create a new
function. So I'll just go down to under
this one and then say export async
function fetch gene sequence. So what
this does is that you give it a gene or
at least the gene's positions and then
it'll fetch the nucleotides for that
gene or at least a range within the gene
and all the nucleotides in that range.
So what I would like to accept is the
chromosome where the gene is on that
it'll be a string then also a start
position on the chromosome which is also
a string and end position and we'll just
need to make these numbers
actually and then also the genome ID and
that is also a string. What we'll return
is a promise because it is an async
function. This promise will return a
dictionary with a sequence that is a
string. So at GS and Z's an actual range
it will have a start which is a number
and an end which is also a number as
well as an error. If that happens that
is just going to be a string. Then I'll
make that a function. And first we can
just define the chromosome. So we'll say
const chromosome is equal to chromosome
dot starts with. So if it does start
with a chromosome, let me just fix this.
If it does start with chromosome, then
we'll just use the chromosome. But if it
isn't prefixed with chromosome like
that, we'll just go ahead and prefix it
with that. So we'll say chromosome and
then chromosome like this. This is just
to ensure that we follow the standards
that the API uses. Then we're going to
say const API start is equal to start
minus one. So for the UC Santa Cruz API
we'll use they use a zerobased start and
then an exclusive end. So for the start
it'll be start minus one and for the end
we'll then have to say just
end because the end is exclusive. So we
we don't need to subtract one right
here. And then for the actual fetch URL
we'll say const API URL is equal to
formatted string. So
https API.gome
genome. Santa
Cruz.edu get
data and then
sequence where we pass in the query
parameters. Genome is equal
to genome
ID and we just need to put in a
semicolon right here. And the chromosome
will be equal
to the
chromosome. And the starts will be equal
to API
starts and the
end will be equal to API
end like that. So we can just go ahead
and fetch that URL. So we'll say con
response is equal to awaits fetch API
URL and then we can say const data is
equal to
awaits
response.json like this and then we can
see the documentation if you just hop
into this URL it is the UC Santa Cruz
API which we have worked with already
but we'll just use a sequence endpoint
right now. So get data SLsequence to
return a sequence from a specific
database. And then one thing I just want
to show you as well is the errors. So I
think it should be down here. Return er
return examples. If we just click this
one and then say pretty print. We see
that we get an error key right here. So
we can use this to find out what the
error actually is by for example
printing this. So let me just hop back
out of
this and then into our
application. We'll just create a a
variable called actual
range which is the actual range
requested which will be equal to start
comma end. Then we can say if data error
which we just saw. If that is there then
there obviously is an error. So we'll
then say return
sequence which is nothing and then the
actual range as well as the error and
that'll just be data
error. So this right there then we can
get the actual sequence from data.dna.
So we'll say sequence is equal to
data.dna. So just to make sure that this
property is here, I'll then also say all
not data dna. Then down here I can say
two
uppercase. So we get atgc's instead of
atgc's like this. And then down here I
can just say
return sequence dot actual range and
then just leave out the error which
obviously isn't going to be there right
now. Then I'll just take this entire
thing and wrap it inside a try catch. So
I'll say
try and catch and I'll catch the
error. So this and then in here I can
just return an error message as well. So
I'll just go ahead and say error like
this. And then the actual range will
then just be the start and the end like
that. So I'll say
actual
range and then I'll just call this error
something like internal error
infetch gene
sequence. Great. Then we can hop back
into the gene viewer. And here we'll
just create a function that can fetch
the genes um sequence for us. Set the
gene sequence up here and then also keep
track of floating etc. So I'll just say
const fetch gene sequence is equal to
use
callback and then I'll say async starts
which is a number end which is also a
number inside this I'll pass in a
dependency array so it'll depend on the
gene dot chromosome and also genome ID.
So this function will only be recreated
if these ones change right here. Then I
can say
try and catch
error. And then I'll quickly just create
the use state which we'll need to store
what is returned from the genome API. So
up here I'll just say const and then
sequence and set sequence. I'll just
call this gene sequence and then set
gene
sequence is equal to use state that is
just going to be an empty string for
starters. I'll then create a loading
state as well. So I'll say I'll just
copy this actually and then say const is
loading sequence and set is loading
sequence. Then there's going to be the
bounds of the sequence which is the max
and minimum. So the minimum and maximum
that the sequence view can show. But the
user will always also be able to pick
these bounds themselves. So there will
be an actual range. So I'll say
const and then actual
range set actual
range is equal to use
states and this will just be null for
now. And then I'll go ahead and say a
start which is number and end which is
also a number or
null. So that is what we'll work with.
So the first first thing we'll do is say
set is loading sequence. We'll set that
to true. Then we'll set error to null in
case there was an error. We'll then
clear the previous error. Then we can
say const result is equal
to fetch gene sequence and we'll not
reference this one. We'll reference the
one from over here from the genome API.
So I'll just take this
one import it up here and then call it
as API fetch gene sequence. This way we
can differentiate between the local one
and the one we're importing. So this one
one will then be awaits API fetch gene
sequence. Oh sorry that is
details. It is right up here. So API
fetch gene sequence. Then I pass in the
gene chromosome. We'll pass in start end
and the genome ID. And we of course just
need to await this as well. And then we
can dstructure the output to the
sequence actual range and the error. So
we'll say
sequence actual
range and we'll just say we'll call this
fetch range because we already have a
state up here called actual range and
I'll then also say error. I can then go
ahead and say set gene sequence set that
to the sequence. I can say set actual
range to the fetched
range. And this one I'll just call API
error as well. Then I can say
if there is an there is an API error
then I'll set the error to API error.
And if an error was then caught down
here we'll then set the error to fail to
load sequence
data. And I'll then say
finally set is loading sequence and I'll
set that to false. So that always
happens. So now the gene data can
automatically be loaded whenever the
gene the gene details are loaded as well
down here. So I'll say wait fetch gene
sequence we pass in the fetch gene or
actually the gene details. So I'll say
fetched detail just to avoid name
conflicts fetched gene
bounds as well as an initial range which
will just be fetched range like this. So
now I'll just call this fetch bounce
fetch details and then also fetch range
instead of the initial
range and then we can say fetch range.st
start and we can say fetch range. Then
if we go ahead and just try and print
out this after it has been done we can
say console.lo and then
fetch let me just try the details first
of all. So fetch
details and then I'll also like to just
print out the fetch gene sequence. So
I'll hop in here and
just content.log and I'll say sequence
and then refresh over here and then we
can try and load the BSA1 example. Click
one of these. So no details about the
gene is actually being printed out. And
I had to spend a couple of minutes
figuring out why. So the reason is that
in here in the genome API I made a
little a little spelling error. So
instead of gene ID with a small D, you
have to make it a large D. So you save
now and then you can refresh over here
and try the example again. And now it
should print out some information over
here. So you see all this information
about the gene as well as a single G
from the sequence right here. So I just
checked out that error that error as
well because the sequence should
definitely be longer than just a single
nucleotype. So what I found is that if I
hop into API fetch gene sequence then in
here I can scroll down to wait up to the
range. So this initial range which is
used to fetch the gene sequence. The
problem is that this is minimum in both
places. This has to be minimum and this
has to be maximum. So I'll just save and
then we can try it again over here. So
try BC1
example and now we see the entire
sequence being printed out. One thing is
though that you see it being printed out
twice. So it seems like it is doing it
twice. And the reason for this is that
there is something called react strict
mode that hasn't that hasn't been
enabled. So what I usually do when I
have problems with things rendering
twice when they should only render once
and it actually causes problems for me
is that I hop into my next conf.js and
set react strict mode to false. If it is
not false, then it might render twice
for some components when you're using
the development server. So, hopping back
over here and just refreshing
everything. I then just try it out again
and see if it does it twice again. So,
now we see the sequence being printed
out only once. So, that fixed that
issue. So, I'll just hop back into the
gene viewer. So now that we basically
have all the data we need or we do have
all the data we need for showing the
gene details in this card as we talked
about earlier, I can just clean up the
console.logs because we don't really
need those anymore. So this one, that
one, and that one. And then I'll create
a new component. So under components,
I'll create a new one called gene
information.csx. In here, I'll say
export function gene information.
This will take a
gene gene detail as well as a and let me
just make this a little bit smaller
again as well as a
gene bounce. And I can just define the
types of these properties. So this gene
is going to be a gene from search. The
gene detail will just be gene details
from search or null. The gene bounce
will be gene bounce or
null. And I'll then just
return oh sorry I'll just
return an H1 for now that just says
hello. So I can then take this gene
information hop back into the gene
viewer and then we can plop that in
right here. So I'll say gene
information oh import the component and
then I can pass down the gene. I can
pass down the gene
detail and I can pass down the gene
bounce like this. And now we are able to
see the component being rendered out
right here. So I would like to render
out a card from Shhatzen. So I'll say
card import that. Then I can say class
gap
zero border
none. I can say BG whites py0 shadow
small. I can then just put in a card
header. The card header should have a
card title. The card title should be
gene
information. The card header should have
the
styling
pt4 and padding ball a padding bottom
too like this. And the card title should
then have text small font normal. And it
should have
text 3 C 4 D 3D at
70%. And this just needs to be an F
instead of AD. And for the card content,
we can start out with a card content
component. And inside this, we'll then
say class name padding bottom four. We
can then put in a div with the class
name grid gap 4 at medium or above.
We'll say grid calls 2. Then we can put
in another div inside here where we put
it in the class names space
y2. We can then put in another div with
the class name flex. And lastly, we can
put in a span that says
symbol. For the span, we'll style it a
little bit. We'll say width of 28,
minimum width of 28 as well. To force
it, we'll then say text extra
small and we can say
text with this color up
here. And I'll just tone that down as we
will. I'll just copy this span right
here. Or sorry, the
flex. And I just forgot one thing
quickly up here. I'll just say span. And
then I'll
say gene do symbol. And this I'll just
put on some glasses for as well. I'll
say text extra small and then font
medium like that. And then you can see
where we're going with this. So down
here we'll just do the same for
gene.name. And then this will then just
be name instead. I can then copy this
entire thing again. And then I can say
if
gene.escription
and gene.escription description is not
the same as
gene.name. If that is the case, then I
would like to render
out the following right here. And then
I'll just say
gene.escription and description right
here. Then I can just show the
chromosome property as well. So I can go
ahead and say
chromosome gene. chromosome. And then we
also just want to show the gene position
within the uh the chromosomes that is
going to be determined by the gene
bounds. So I can just go ahead and say
if gene
bounce like that. Then I'll say
position. I'll then just remove the font
medium. And inside the span, I'll go
ahead and say math dominimum gene bounce
minimum gene bounce
maximum dot to
string. And then outside this I'll just
put in a dash like that. A forced space
as
well. And then I can put in the same
just for the upper bound.
So in this line instead I'll say max as
well as the difference so the user can
see that. So I'll say base pass and then
I can go ahead and
say
math abs and then we'll put in the
genebounds
domax and subtract the gene bounce.m
minimum and then just add one and that
is because of the zerobased positioning.
So I just want to put this inside a
parenthesis. So I can go ahead and do
this and just add in one more of these
forced spaces right there. So now we see
the actual amount of base pairs as well.
And I can just say to local string for
all of these three and when I save it
then be formatted with your local
string. So in this case it is a comma
that is the thousand separator. So this
is way nicer to look at than just the
normal string. And then lastly we also
saved whether it was a reverse strand or
not. So going down here I can say if
gene
detail dot genomic
info and then we can say
zero
dotstrand is equal to
minus then we'll
say
reverse strand like that and then down
here we can just do the next part of the
box so I'll say diff and then class name
space y2 I can then a gene. ID. So if
that is there, then we'll render out a
link to the actual gene. So you can
click it and then see where we fed the
gene from, as well as more information
about that specific gene. So I'll put in
a diff
here. I'll just close the div. Again,
inside this div, I'll say class name
flex. I'll put in a span. So this will
have gene ID inside of it. So we'll just
style that as well. So I'll just grab
this from up
here. Put it into the span. So class
name. And actually I'll just make this
font medium as well just so it looks
looks the same as as the other ones up
here. So now that we have the gene ID,
we can also go ahead and render out the
link. So I'll put in this other span
too. So I'll say span class text extra
small. Then I can say anchor. Inside the
anger, we'll put in the gene. ID and
we'll also put in an external link from
seed react. We'll give it the the class
names margin left one to space it a
little bit from the gene ID text inline
block and then H2 and width two. So
it'll look like this. So this is kind of
what you expect whenever you click a
link that opens up a new page. And then
for the anchor itself, we'll then say
href and the href will be a formatted
string. So we'll go to
https and then
www.ncpi.nlm.nih.gov slash
gene slash and then we'll put in
gene.gene
id. So whenever we hover it up here and
click it, right now it can't be reached
because it is GIV instead of G
O. So I'll just try
again. So when I click it
now, it should take us to the other
page. Perfect. So now we can see the
BSA1 gene, which is the one we're
currently on. Great. So, we just need to
open this in another page because it
isn't very nice of us to redirect the
users's page to another page. We should
instead open it in a new tab. So, to do
this with an anchor, we can go ahead and
say target and then underscore
blank like this. And I'll also add some
classes to that as well. So, I'll say
class name and then text blue
600 hover underline. And then when I
hover it over here, it lets us know that
we're able to actually go ahead and
click it. So this is what I mean by
opening it up in a new tab. That is what
is going on right here. Good. Then I'll
what I'll just do is just test this with
a little bit of big of a size. See if it
looks better. Maybe we can say inside
this anchor we can do flex and then
items
center. It looks a little bit better now
I think. Yeah, let's go with that. Cool.
So under this we'll then say gene detail
dot
organism and if that is the case we'll
render out a diff that contains
information about the organism. The
first thing we'll render out is a span
that says
organism like this. I'll then just save
that and format this a little bit nicer.
So class name
flex organism width 28 text extra small
and then I'll grab the usual text color
from up
here. Then I'll put in one more span
class text extra
small and then
say gene detail dot
organism dot scientific name. I'll then
also just show the common name. So if I
just copy this entire thing, I can then
say or I'll just do a conditional as
well. Then I'll say if this common name
is there, then I'll render it out. So
I'll say formatted
string and then go ahead and do that. So
we then see the scientific name, homo
sapiens, and the common name which is
just human. And lastly, we can put in
the details. So, or sorry, the summary.
So, I'll say gene detail dot
summary
and
diff. Inside this diff, I'll just say
class name
MT4. I'll put in an
H3 summary. I'll put in class
name MP2 text extra small font medium
and then text in the usual text
color like this. Then under this I can
just put in a paragraph and
say gene detail dot
summary and
say class name text extra small leading
relaxed and then just take the text
color
again and tone it down to about 80%. So
this will then be the entire info box
for this specific gene. And this is how
it is going to look both on larger
screens as well as on smaller screens. I
think I'll just remove this font medium
up here since it is there sometimes but
not there other times. So I'll remove it
right there, right there and also these
two
places. And then I think I need to
remove it right here as well.
So now it all looks the same. So it's a
it's a little bit better in my opinion.
I will then create a gene sequence card
as well. This will also be a component.
So remember how we printed out this
large sequence of up to 10,000
nucleotides for this specific gene.
Well, I would like to visualize these in
a in a card as well. And they should
also be formatted in a nice ways with
colors that mark each single nucleotide.
So to get started with this, I'll just
hop into the UI or sorry components.
Create a new file in here. This should
be called gene
sequence.tsx. I'll then say
export
function gene
sequence. And then I'll say uh I'll just
leave out
the properties for now actually. And
then in here I'll just
return a H1 saying
hello. I'll then just make this a client
component. So use client. Save this. Hop
back into the gene viewer. And then I'll
place it right over the gene information
component like that. And save that. And
now we should see hello. And then we can
stack these cards above a sorry on top
of each other because we have them
inside the space Y6 div. And this diff
will then just be a column with a little
bit of space between the cards. So first
things first, I'll hop into the gene
sequence. And then we can start defining
the properties that will be needed to
show the gene sequence. So the first
property is going to be gene
bounds. So gene bounce and the gene
bounce will just be of type gene bounce
like this or null. So there's going to
be a range slider. So let me just find
this range
slider. So range slider is something
like this. So this is a range slider for
the nucleotide or that is what we're
going to build. So there will be a
minimum bound right here. That is the
minimum position of the nucleotides in a
gene. There will also be a maximum bound
for that. And then the user can then
specify a range right here. So a minimum
shown range and a maximum shown range.
And all the nucleotides within this
range is what is going to be loaded and
then shown on the screen. And there will
then also be a maximum range. So that is
a maximum distance these two knobs can
be from each other. And the reason is
that if the minimum and maximum bounds
are very far apart, so maybe hundreds or
thousands of nucleotides, that is a lot
of data to load. So we'll limit the
range between these knots or the
distance between these knobs to be only
10,000 nucleotides. So that is also the
reason why we're going to need stuff
such as gene bounds and other props
which you will see in just a second.
Cool. So hopping back. Oh, I just closed
it right there. So hopping back into the
gene sequence, the next property is
going to be gene detail. So the gene
details are going to give this component
detail gene info. So right here it's
mainly used to show the DNA strand. So
whether it is positive or negative. So
we'll then just call
this gene details from search or null.
Then we'll also supply a start
position. The start position is going to
be a string. We'll give it an end
position. The end position is as well
going to be a string. So that is going
to be the two knobs on the range slider.
This is going to be the minimum knob and
this is going to be the maximum knob.
And the gene bounce is then going to be
the minimum and maximum for the entire
gene. And these should then al of course
then also be able to be changed. So the
start and end position because those are
two knobs. And whenever they changed,
we'll then fetch or refetch the sequence
that is loaded in the parent component.
So gene parent component. So the gene
viewer. So we'll need to have some way
to let the parent component know that
these has been changed. So we'll say on
start position change. So this will be a
function with the value that it has been
changed to. And that'll just return
void. And we'll also have an on end
position change which will just do the
exact same thing as well. We of course
also need to pass down the sequence
data. So the sequence data is just going
to be a string of ages and
C's. And then for
the sequence
range that'll be start number end number
or
null. So I'll just say number here as
well. And the sequence range right here
then specifies the genomic coordinates
corresponding to the displayed sequence
data. So the coordinate of the start and
then also the end position in the
chromosome. We'll also then pass down
the is loading boolean flag from the
parent that indicates if the sequence is
currently fetching. And this is of
course just going to be a
boolean. We'll pass down any fetch
errors such as uh a string if that is
that. Otherwise it'll just be null if
there's no errors. We also want to pass
down a function that can just trigger
refetching of the sequence data such as
if the start and end positions are
changed without these being called. So
we can go ahead and say on uh
sequence load
request and this will just be a function
returning void. Then we can say on
sequence click as
well. And this is for when a single
nucleotide is clicked. And when a single
nucleotide is clicked inside this big
list of of the nucleotides, then this
should be passed back to the parent
component and then in the card which
we'll make in the future containing the
variant analysis. That specific
nucleotide and its position will then be
highlighted for doing the variant
analysis. So to actually select a
nucleotide, we'll need the position of
that nucleotide in the chromosome and
we'll also say
nucleotide which is the base. And this
will then just return void. And lastly,
we'll pass down a max view range. And
this max view range will define the
maximum allowed sequence length for both
the validation and slider constraints.
So this will then just be the number
right here. So now I just got to go
ahead and dstructure these. So I'll just
copy paste them in one by
one. Start
position position as well. And then on
position
change sequence data right here.
Sequence range is loading
error as well on sequence load
request on sequence click and max view
range. So to be able to follow along
with what we're actually building in
real time, I would like to just pass
down the props such that we don't get an
error over here. So right now if I
refresh and then go to this we don't
really see anything and also we get an
error over here but I would like to pass
down the props so that we can work with
the life data. So the gene bounds is
going to be I can just say add missing
attributes first of all and then the
gene bounds are going to be gene bounds
like that. The gene detail will be gene
detail. The start position is going to
be start position. End position will be
end position. On start position change,
we'll say um just set start
position. For the end position change,
we'll say set end position. For the
sequence data, we'll say gene sequence.
For the sequence range, we'll say actual
range. Is loading will be is loading
sequence. Error will then be error. The
max view range is going to be 10,000. So
that is the maximum amount of
nucleotides we will be able to load. And
then these two right here we'll just
leave unimplemented for now and then
we'll do a little bit later whenever we
come to that point. So first hopping
into gene sequence we can return a card.
So I'll go ahead and say card. We'll say
class
name and then let me just implement the
card like that. Oh sorry import the
card. We'll then put on the class name
gap zero border none bgt white py zero
and shadow small.
We'll then on also put on a card header
like this. And inside the card header,
we'll put in the card title as well. So
we'll say card title. We'll then say
gene
sequence. And then just import the card
header as well. So now we should be able
to hop into this menu and see gene
sequence. Then for card header, we'll
just put in PT4 PB2. And for the cut
title, we'll put on the class names.
Text small
font. And we just need to spell this
correctly. Font normal
text. And then 3C 4F 3D and then
-70 or sorry slash70. Good. And then for
the actual card content in itself, card
content, we can just go ahead and import
that. Then we'll say class name padding
bottom four. And then we can say if gene
bounds is not null then what I would
like to show is a diff. In here we can
say class name margin bottom four
flex flex column and we can then show
some range information. So we'll say div
inside here we'll just put in a
span. So I'll say span and I'll put in a
paragraph into the span that says from.
I'll put in another paragraph that
says math
dominimum. So math dot
minimum gene bounds
dominimum gene bounds dot
maximum dot to local string like this.
And we'll just format this just a little
bit. So I'll say class name margin
bottom two flex flex column items center
justify between text extra small
um small flex row. So on larger devices
it'll be a row. And for the styling of
the span right here, we'll say flex
items center gap one text. And then
we'll put in the text color from up here
as
well. So this one. I'll then put in this
paragraph and say class name hidden on
larger devices. And you'll be able to
see the full example of why in just a
bit. So let me just take this and copy
the span right here.
So I'll copy this band down below and
then say two. This is then going to be
domax
instead. And now we have a from and we
have a two. And then I'll just show the
selected in between that. So I'll paste
in the span once again. Oh, this needs
to be text both there, there as well as
right there. And for this one in the
middle, I'll only keep the text parts.
And then in the div or inside the span,
I'll just go ahead and say
selected and then
pass integer start position or just zero
dot two local
string and then outside this I can say
dash put in a forced space. Under this
I'll say pass
int. So I'll just do the exact same
thing again.
And then instead of start position, it
is going to be end
position. And then I'll
say some number, I'll just do one, two,
three right now. And then say base pass
right after this. So I'll say bp. And I
would like to just enclose this in
parenthesis like
that. So it is going to look like this
right here. And I'll just force in
a spacing right there. So on smaller
devices, it'll look like this right
here. And on larger devices, it is going
to look like this. So you have the lower
bound, the upper bound, the bound that
is selected in the range slider, as well
as how big the size of this selected
range is. And we of course just need
just need to calculate the actual size
of the range instead of just hard coding
1 2 3. So I'll say const current range
size is equal to a use memo. This means
that the calculation done inside or the
computation done inside this statement
right here is only going to be done
every time the dependencies or the
variables in this array right here
changes. So we'll put in the start
position as well as the end position. So
whenever these variables change, it
should recalculate the range size, which
makes sense. So we'll say const start
equals pass
int start position. We'll do the same
just for the end position. Call this
end. Then I'll say
return and this depends on is not a
number
start. So if start is not a number or
end is not a number
or end is less than start then what
we'll do is say zero otherwise it'll be
end minus start plus one and this plus
one again is because of the zero base
positioning. So what it does what this
does is that we are using this pass in
right here. So if start is not a number
or end is not a number or end is smaller
than start which doesn't really make
sense then we'll just set it to zero.
Otherwise, we'll actually calculate the
range size between end between start and
end and then return that right here. So
now we should be able to hop down and
just use this. So instead of 1 2 3 we
can go ahead and call it and say dot to
local string and call that function. And
now we see 10,0001 right here. And it
seems like there is a little problem
with this plus
one. So right now the last number is the
same but with a 10,000 base pair
difference. So this should all of course
also be 10,000. So I'll just go ahead
and remove the plus one. And then we can
move on to the slider component that is
actually the range slider. So under this
div here, I'll put in a slider
component. I'll just make a comment
around this just so we know what is
what. So this will be a div with the
class name space y for. We'll put in
another div inside of this. This div
will have class name
relative. Inside this div, we'll put in
another one with the class name relative
h6 with full and cursor pointer. And
inside this we'll create the actual
slider. So first we'll start with the
track
background. So I'll just make that a
comment. Then I'll say div and I can put
in some class name absolute top 1 and a
half or sorry 1/2 height of two width of
full minus translate
um
y 1/2 rounded full and background should
be the color we have used a lot of
times. So E9 and then e
e a. So that is going to be the track
background for the range slider. Then we
can put in the selected range. So I'll
just say selected range. Make that a
comment as well. So this will be a diff
two. Inside this div I'll put in some
classes. This will be absolute as well.
top
1/2 h two minus translate minus y minus
12 cursor
grab. So we can just uh press save right
now and then if I just put in with full
right here and then go up here we should
be able to see cursor grab. So that is
what you see right here. So that is
cursor grab. Good. I'll just remove the
width full again and leave cursor grab
and then I can say
rounded full
background 3C for ref and then 3D like
that. I'll then just say when active
then we'll
say cursor grabbing. So that is another
state. There is cursor grab. So when the
cursor is about to grab then there is
cursor grabbing. when we are holding
down the cursor. So when we're clicking
basically, then it'll look like we're
grabbing something. Then we'll put in
some manual styles as well that needs to
be calculated inside the style property
right here. So we'll put in a style with
a dictionary inside of that that is
supposed to contain the CSS style
properties. The left will then be a
formatted string. This will
be slider values which we'll go ahead
and create in just a second. So this
will contain the slider values. So we'll
just say dot start for this one. And
then this will be a number which we'll
attach a percentage to. We'll do the
exact same thing just
for the width. So we'll say width this
will be slider values dot end minus
slider values start and it will be
evaluated to a number which we can then
append a percentage sign to. So I'll hop
up here and then we can go ahead and
create the slider values which is going
to be some kind of data structure which
can contain these values for the slider.
So I'll just use a use state for that.
So I'll say const slider values set
slider values is equal to use states.
We'll have the start which is just zero
and the end which is just going to be
100. I'll import the use state and then
scroll back down here. I'll just load
the example once again. And then if I
scroll back back up for example and say
50, we can see that the width just
changed right there. So I'll just hop
back down and then just create the start
handle. So that'll
be the start handle. So the knob that is
supposed to manage the start number.
This will be a diff. We'll put in a
class name of
absolute. Then top 1/2. We'll put in
flex height of six, width of six as
well. Minus translate x
1/2. We'll also do minus translate y2.
We'll do cursor grab items center
justify center as well rounded
full border
2 border color of hashtag 3C 4f
3D bgt white shadow and then active
cursor grabbing
So I'll just go ahead and save that. And
now we have some kind of knob over here.
And then when I click down, we can see
the cursor grabbing right here as well.
Then we'll just need to calculate its
position based on the start up here. And
then for the same just the end knob,
we'll just calculate the position based
on the end. So I'll take this and just
add a style property to that as well and
press save. Then we'll just calculate
the left value just like it is done
right here. And then inside the div, I
would like to just put in another div.
Here I'll say class name H3 width one
rounded full and then a BG of green. So
that is going to be hashtag
freec for ref and then 3D again. I'll
press save. So that is what we're seeing
right here. That is going to be the
start knob. I'll then just take this
start handle and copy it down here and
call this one end handle and step. And
the left value of this one of course
just need to be calculated based on end
instead of start. So in hovering up here
we can set this to 10 maybe and this one
we can set to 60. So that means it'll
look kind of like this. And then we just
need to implement some logic for being
able to drag these around because right
now we can't really do that. So to keep
track of the dragging itself, we'll need
to keep track of dragging on the x-axis.
You won't be able to drag on the y-
axis. So we only need to keep track of
the x-axis dragging. So we'll need a few
use state variables. First, we'll need
const is dragging
start and set is tracking
start. This is also just going to be a
use state that is a boolean. So this
will be false per default.
So you can do three things right here.
You can grab onto the start handle and
drag that which will change only the
start number right here. You can grab
onto the end handle do the same only for
the end number. And if you have a handle
or sorry a range that is maybe 60 to 70.
Then I want you to able to be able to
also grab onto the green part right here
in the middle and then drag both handles
by grabbing onto the green part instead
of the handles themselves. If you do
this and drag, it should update up
update both these numbers with the
difference in dragging at the same time.
So to do these things, we'll need to
keep track of whether you're dragging
the start handle, whether you're
dragging the end handle as we're doing
right now, and then whether you're
dragging the entire
range. So range there and range right
there. We'll then also create a
reference to the slider. So I'll say
const slider ref. And then I'll say is
equal to use ref. I'll just import that.
and say that is an HTML div element and
that is null per default. We'll also
need to implement a drag startx. So this
will keep track of the value that we
have currently dragged on the x-axis and
this will implement as a use ref instead
of a use state to perform or sorry to
avoid unnecessary rerenders and just
make performance better generally. So
this will persist something across
renders without triggering a rerender
when the value is updated. Inside this,
we'll put in an X that is going to be a
number. A start position that is also
going to be a number as well as an end
position which is also going to be a
number. And this can also be null. So
I'll say or null. And we'll just set it
to null per default like this. So I see
we have an error right here. So I'll
just go ahead and remove that. And then
I would like to implement a method. So
we'll say const
handle mouse down. This will be a use
call
back that will receive a a react that
mouse event. So react dot mouse
events and I'll say comma handle which
will also receive that can be either the
start handle or the end handle. Inside
this we can then say e.prevent defaults
because it is an event. Then we can say
if handle is equal to start then we'll
set is dragging
start to true and then the same if it is
the end. So I'll go ahead and say end
right
there and then put in an else right
here. And I'll then just also add in a
dependency array because it is a use
callback. So we'll only want to create
this method once. So that is what we'll
do right here. So I can copy this
function declaration hop down to the
start and the end handle which we just
created down here and inside these
handles I can say on mouse down. So on
mouse down we'll then copy this
function. We'll call it like this
though. So pass in the event as well as
the start handle. And then I'll do the
same just for the end handle down here
and then say end instead of start. This
should then let let us know in the state
right here. So
the set is dragging start and is
tracking end that we are actually
dragging. And then when we're dragging,
we can also keep track of how much we
have dragged with this variable right
there. Now we just need to create a
method for the handle mouse down just
for the entire range instead of just for
the start or the end dragging. So this
one I'll say const handle range mouse
down is equal to use
callback. I'll pass in the react event
again. So react do mouse
events and then I'll say e.prevent
defaults put in a dependency array. This
will depend on the start position as
well as the end position.
So this ref we created up here the
slider ref we'll just need to attach to
the actual slider. So I'll hop down so
we can find the slider and we have
cursor pointer right here. So that is
the slider. Then I'll say ref is equal
to slider ref. This means we can get
information about this HTML element
through this variable right here. So
hopping back up what we can do is say if
and then not slider ref.curren
current then we'll
return then we can get the start
position and the end position. So we'll
say con con start number is equal to
pass in start position. We can then also
say end
number and this will then just be end
position. I can then say is or sorry if
is not a number start number or is not a
number end number because the user can
fill this in themselves and then I can
say then we just return because then we
won't really need to to drag it
otherwise we'll set is dragging
range to
true and then I can get the information
about the current slider from this
slider ref. So I'll go ahead and say con
slider reacts or sorry slider reacts is
equal to slider ref.urren dot
get bounding box uh client sorry get
bounding client rectangle then I can say
const relative x is equal to e.cl x
minus slider
rectangle dot
left. So what this does right here is
that it calculates the horizontal
position. So that is this one here of
the mouse click relative to the left
edge of the slider element. So this
right here is the mouse position
relative to the view port. And this
right here is going to be the slider uh
slider's left edge position relative to
the viewport. And the reason we are
calculating this is that we need to
record the starting point of the drag
operation. So where the user clicked
within the slider and then what the
genomic start and end positions were at
that exact moment. And this is important
because we later need to calculate how
much the range should be shifted based
on the mouse movement. So let's say let
me just open this up. So if I click
right here for example and then drag to
the left then this will be the relative
X that will be dragged from. So if I
click here then then we need to let the
system know that this is where we drag
from and not this is where we drag from
for example. And this information about
where we're dragging from. We can store
this drag start x which we created
earlier. So we'll say current is equal
to x will be relative x. We can then say
start position which will be start
number. And we can say end position
which is going to be the end number. So
it'll just record the value of this one
and this one and then where we start
dragging from. And then I can take this
method right here or sorry function and
then copy it down to the selected range
which we should be able to drag on mouse
down like that. And then when I actually
do go ahead and click it, we don't see
any errors. So that is perfectly good.
We'll just listen for when the mouse has
been uh uncclicked also. So when on
mouse up is fired. So going up here, I
can just say const handle mouse up. And
this will just be a function. In this
function, we'll say if is dragging start
or is dragging end or is dragging
range and start position
and end position as well. That should
then trigger loading the new sequence
that was just dragged to. So right here,
I'll just go ahead and fix these braces.
So this needs to be in a brace right
here. And then if that is the case, what
I'll then do is say on sequence load
request, which we will pass down from
the parent right here. So this will just
trigger loading the new sequence that we
just dragged to whenever we drag one of
these sliders. So, for example, when
dragging this slider over here, for
example, and then dropping it again,
then I wanted to automatically load the
new sequence of nucleotides down below
without the user having to click any
buttons. So, I'll go ahead and do that.
And then right below, I'll say set is
dragging
start. And I'll set that to false. I'll
do the same for the end because now we
aren't dragging anymore. I'll do the
same for the range. And I'll also set
drag startx.curren to null. Then we'll
just create another method. This method
is going to be handle mouse move. So
whenever you do move the mouse, we need
to calculate where these should be
dragged to. And then also change these
positions. This will be a new function
that takes an event that will be a mouse
event like this. And I'll take both of
these functions and just copy them and
say use effect. And then we'll add them
to a use effect where we can then fire
these functions when their given events
require them to be fired. So I'll add
these two functions and then I'll say
window dot add event listener and I'll
add an event listener for mouse
move and then when mouse move is
happening we'll then say handle mouse
move call this function we'll do the
same just below when we say mouse
up like that and then we can call mouse
up for that as well and then we'll just
need to unsubscribe to these events as
well so we'll go ahead and do
do the exact same thing but just say
remove event listener
instead for both of these. So when the
mouse moves we should calculate the new
positions as well. So first we'll check
whether we are actually dragging or not
because if we are moving the mouse but
we aren't dragging well we obviously
don't have to calculate anything. We
should just skip this handle mouth move
mouse move method. So I'll say if
not is tracking
start or sorry and is not is dragging
end and we are not dragging the range.
So is dragging
range then I'll just
return then I can also say if slider
riff.c current because as you can see
when we hover it it can be null. So we
want to make sure that it is not null or
not gene bounds. Well then we'll just go
ahead and return. So half gene bounds
this can also be null. So we want to
avoid that as well. So remember that
when we click down on the range right
here we recorded the relative position
within this range that we clicked. So we
can be able to calculate the distance
between that and then whenever we have
dragged it. So that position after
having dragged it. So we'll need to take
the difference between those. So, I'll
actually just copy these two lines right
here because we'll need to do the same.
So, I'll just paste those two in right
here along with the slider width. This
will then be slider
rect. Now, we can calculate the mouse's
hor horizontal position as percentage
along the slider width. So, we'll go
ahead and say let new percent be equal
to relative x divided by slider
width. and then we'll say times 100. We
then also want to ensure that the
calculated percentage right here stays
within the valid range of 0 to 100
preventing it from going outside the
slightest bounce. So we can then say new
percent is equal to math domax. Then
we'll say zero math dominimum new
percent and then 100 right here. This
will always keep it inside between zero
and 100. Then I'm going to say const
minbound is equal to math dominimum
genebounds dot minimum genebounds
domaxim and I'll do the same just for
maxbound and this will be max but we'll
put in the same parameters. So basically
if min is larger than max for some
reason then min will become or then max
will become min and then the opposite
for max. So we just get the smallest one
and the largest one. And then we can
calculate the gene size. So const gene
size is equal to maxbound minus
minbound and just calculate that. And
now we can then calculate the new
position. So this will translate the
mouse's position percentage into the
corresponding genomic coordinate within
the genome's bounce. So we can go ahead
and say const new
position and then is equal to math round
and we'll pass in minimum bound
plus gene size times new percent and
divide that by 100 like this. I will
then just get the current start number.
So I'll say current start number which
is going to be pass in start position.
I'll then also get the current end
number like that which is going to be
start and then end position. Then what I
can do is handle these different cases.
The first case is going to be if they're
dragging the start handle right here.
The second case is going to be dragging
the end handle and the third case is
going to be dragging the entire handle
or sorry the entire range. So that means
both handles at the same time. So if you
are dragging the start handle then we'll
first check whether this current start
number right here or sorry current end
number is a number or not. So we'll say
if is not a number current number. So
this current number will will act as a
fix point to calculate how wide the
range is. In this way if the range is
stretched to more than 10,000 base pairs
it will can be constrained to 10,000
base pairs. So it doesn't move past that
level. So first I'll say if current end
number minus new
position oh sorry plus one is larger
than the max view range. So that is the
10,000 number. Then what I'll do is then
say on start position change. So we'll
notify the parent and we'll pass in the
new position. So this will be a new
string where we put in current number
minus max view
range plus one. If we do not need to
constrain it, we'll say else
if new
position is larger than the current
start number.
Then we can just go ahead and say on
start position change and pass in a
string with the new position. Then if
we're dragging the end, we can just take
this entire statement and say else if
instead of uh just if then this will be
is dragging end instead of is dragging
start because we're dragging this handle
right here. This will this will be the
current start
number. And for this case instead if the
new
position minus the current start
number plus
one is larger than the max view range
then we can say on and position change
and then we can say current start number
plus max view range minus one. So this
will have to be current start number and
we'll need to do the same right here as
well and just save. Then if we're
dragging the entire range, that is
another case. So we'll say else if is
dragging range. And if that is the case,
we'll first say if not drag.x current.
If that is null, then we'll just return
because then we won't really have the
information we need to be able to
calculate how much we have dragged the
range. So I'll say return. So first I
would like to define how many uh pixels
on this slider represent one genomic
base. So we can do this by saying const
pixels per base is equal to slider width
divided by the gene size. So this will
be the amount of nucleotides in the
sequence or sorry not in the sequence
but in the entire gene actually. We can
then calculate the horizontal distance
in pixels the mouse has moved since the
drag started. So this will be const drag
delta pixels. This will be equal to
relative x minus drag startx dot
current dox like this and then we can
find out how many delta or how many
bases we have actually dragged now. So
we'll say const drag delta bases. So
we'll need to convert to how many pixels
we have dragged to how many bases we
have dragged. So we'll say math equals
math.round because you might not hit a
specific base whenever you do these
divisions. So we can say method round
drag delta pixels divided by pixels per
base and save that. Then we can shift
the original start position by the
calculated number of bases. So what
we'll do is say let new start be equal
to drag start x
um current start position plus drag
delta
basis and we'll do the same just for the
end. So how much we should change the
position. So this will be end
position and the range size. So con
range size will then be equal to
drag.x plus current plus end position
minus the start position like that. And
then we also want to make sure we don't
exceed the minimum or maximum bounds of
the gene itself. So we'll say if new
start is less than the minimum bound of
the gene itself then we can say new
start is equal to the minimum bound. So
we'll constrain it to the minimum bound
and new end will then just be minimum
bound plus the range size. And for the
maxbound we can say
if new end is larger than max bound then
new end is equal to
maxbound and new start is equal to
maxbound minus the range size. Lastly I
can say on start position change. Then
we'll change the position to new start
and we'll also set to new end the end
position. So
on end position
change and then we just need to add all
of these variables or all the state
variables which we depend on to the
dependency array such that the use
effect rerenders the component whenever
these changes so we can actually see the
difference. So we need to add add uh
dragging start. We'll need to add
is dragging end as well. Also is
dragging range gene
bounce start
position end
position. So down here as well as the on
start position change on end position
change.
max view range if that changes on
sequence load
request. So on sequence load request
like that and then I'll just save that.
Now I just run into a few errors because
I overlooked a couple of things. So
hopping back up we can see that this is
dragon range is just an empty. So this
obviously need to include all of this.
So I'll just go ahead and include all
this code inside the is dragging range.
And secondly, there is another issue up
here that I just need to fix. So this or
sorry, this down here is need needs to
be changed a little bit. So this has to
be new position is less than current end
number like that. And then whenever I do
save it, we shouldn't run into these
problems later that I just ran into. And
then right now these start position
changes, end position changes. Uh then
up up updating these states in the
parent, but we aren't really updating
the slider that actually controls where
these knobs and also the range should
be. So what I'll do is create a use
effect up here listening to the start
and end positions. So these two and then
updating the slider values to match
those. So hopping down here, I'll say
use effect. And then the first thing I
would like to do is just check for
whether gene bounds are there or not. So
I'll put in an empty dependency array
and then say if not gene bounds. If that
is the case, we'll just return. Then we
can say
const minbound is equal to math
dominimum of genebounds dominimum and
genebounds
domaxim. We'll then do the same just
with max and call this max bound. We can
then calculate the total size again. So
we'll say const
total size is equal to max bound minus
minimum bound. Then let's pass pass the
start and end position to integers. So
we'll say con start number is equal to
pass int start position and we can get
the end position as well. So end
position right here and end number. I
can then say if is not a
number start
number or is not a number the end number
or the total size is less or equal to
zero. Then we'll set the slider values
to just start zero and end 100. And then
we'll return and do nothing more.
Otherwise, we'll say const start
percents will be equal to the start
number minus the minimum
bound and we'll divide this by the total
size and multiply by 100. So this will
make it 2%. We'll do the same just for
the end percent. So I'll say end% and
this will then be the end number minus
the minimum bound. And then the same
over
here. And then what we'll do is just say
set slider values to the start which
will be math
domax zero and then math
dominimum start percent and 100. This
will constrain it between zero and 100
such that the percentage never goes
over. Then we'll just do the same just
for the end. So now we have start and
we'll just set end here as well. And
this call this end number. And this use
effect should loop should then run every
time the start position is changed, the
end position is changed or the gen gene
bounds are changed. Um, and this will
happen whenever these on changes on
position end position change for example
is called and then updates these in the
parent. Cool. I can see we just need to
do this though cuz I made a little spell
spelling error. So I'll just do that and
save. And now if we hop over here, we
should be able to drag around the
slider. So that looks great. If I just
refresh, I saw we got a little error. If
I just refresh, we can also drag around
the end slider and then we get this
error. Let me just check out what that
is. Function not implemented. Perfect.
So that is because of this over here. So
if I just make this a function doing
nothing instead of throwing an error,
hopefully we won't really get an error
that lets us use all of the
functionality. So I can load up an
example and then drag this around like
this. Drag this handle. I can drag this
handle. And I can drag both at the same
time. And then we'll go ahead and
implement these after just implementing
the last parts of the gene sequence.tsx.
First I would like to implement the
manual input position controls. So if I
scroll
down to the gene bounce, hop all the way
down. Then about right here, I can put
in the position
controls. This will be a diff first of
all. And this will have a quite a lot of
classes. So I'll say flex flex column
space y of four. On larger screens,
we'll say flex row and items um
center. And also justify between.
We'll also
say space y
zero. And then inside this div, I'll put
in one more
div. I'll say class name flex items
center and gap 2. In here, we'll put in
a span that says start. We should also
have a class name with the text extra
small and a text color that is freezy
forf
3D at
70%. Like this. And now we can just add
an input field. So let's see if we have
that already. We do from
chaten. And this should have a value.
The value comes from the start
position. Whenever it is changed, we can
fire the onchange event or the onfire on
change event is fired. So we'll say
onchange right here and we'll receive an
event and say on start possession change
and we'll pass in the
e.target dot value. Then we can pass in
the type of input field. So the type
will be
text like this. Then we can also p
in we can also put in the input mode.
This will be numeric. And we could put
in a pattern to match. So this will
be 0 to 9. So the character 0 to 9. So
only these numbers right here. And then
unlimited of those. And this of course
needs needs to be start position. And
then save. I can then take this entire
div right here and copy it down below
and just call this end instead of start.
So I'll say end and just put in a colon
as well. And then I'll say on end
position change the value will be end
position as well. So with these two
input fields done, we can go ahead and
try and change the range. And we can see
the input field changes as well because
they're connected by the use states. And
I can also change this input field to
maybe zero for example or 54. So it
seems to be working out just great. I'll
then also put in a button to manually
trigger the loading the new sequence
after changing some of the numbers
numbers in one of these input fields. So
I'll do that right here. I'll put in a
new button. This button should have the
text depending on whether it is loading
or not. So first is loading. If it is
loading we'll say loading dot dot dot if
the input sequence being fetched is
loading. Otherwise we'll say load
sequence. Then we can just import the
button and style it a little bit as
well. Let me just open it up so we can
see it. So the button should be styled
the following way. We should have size
small. We should then
have disabled when it is
loading when I click it. So on click
I'll say trigger load sequence. So this
will trigger a load sequence from the
parent. And then I'll also put on some
classes. So I'll say class name height
of seven width of full cursor
pointer and then I can say background
#3c4f 3D text extra
small text white hover
background
free and I'll just need to fix this. The
background is supposed to be 3 C 4F 3D
at
90. Then I'll say on larger devices
we'll say width
auto. So I'll just comment out this
right here. And then we can check out
the actual button and see if it looks
like we expect it to. So that is what we
see right here. So it seems like these
input fields are a little bit larger
than the button. So I'll just go ahead
and style those so they become a little
bit smaller. So for the input field,
I'll say class name. Then I would like
to say height of seven, width full. I'll
put in a border as well. So I'll just
grab the border right
here, just this one, or at least the
color for the border. And then I'll say
add 10. And then I'll say text extra
small. And then I'll say on larger
devices width of 28. So it'll look like
this. So now it's the same height as the
load sequence button right here. I can
then take this and copy it down into the
other input field too. And now it looks
alike. So if on smaller devices it'll
look like this. And then when going to
larger devices it'll just scale up so
they'll become side by side instead. So
I think it looks pretty good. So now we
can move on. First of all whenever this
load sequence is clicked right here I'll
then call the function passed down from
the parent to actually load the
sequence. So that is the onsequence load
request. So I'll just call that directly
down here. So right there. Then right
now we won't be able to click the load
sequence because hopping back into gene
viewer we see that this is not
implemented. So I'll just go ahead and
do that first of all. So I'll hop in
here and create a new function const
handle load
sequence. This is going to be wrapped in
a use
callback to avoid unnecessary
rerenderings. I'll put in an empty
dependency array for now which we can
populate after implementing the method.
So first I'll say con start is equal to
pass integer and I like to pass the
start position. I'll do the same just
for the end
position. So I'll say start and end.
Then I can say let validation
error string or null be equal to null.
So this so this will just store any
validation errors that might happen.
Then I can say if is not a number
start or is not a number end. Then we'll
say validation error is equal to please
enter valid start and end
positions. We can then also say else
if start is more or equal to end then
the validation error is going to be
something
like start
position must be less than end
position. We'll then also just check
whether these positions are outside the
gene bounds. So I'll say else if gene
bounds. So if gene bounds are actually
there then we can say const minimum
bound which will be equal to math
minimum and this will then be gene
bounds dot minimum and gene bounds dot
maximum. We can also say maxbound by
just putting in a max instead and then
say
maxbound. I'll then just check whether
we are inside outside the bounds. So I
can say if start is less than minimum
bound then the validation error is going
to be something
like start position
um start do local
string is below the minimum
value then I'll put in the minimum bound
dot to local string as
And then I'll just take this line and
just paste it down or sorry take this
entire if statement paste it down say
else if and then I'll say if the end is
more than the maximum bound which is the
opposite then we'll say end position
then end is below the or sorry
is I'll just say exceeds the
maximum value of maximum bound to logo
string and lastly we'll check if their
distance between each other is more than
the max view range. So 10,000. So I'll
go ahead and say if end minus starts is
more than max view range. So this will
be
10,000. Then I'll say validation error
is equal
to
selected range
exceeds
maximum view range of
10,000 base pairs.
So because this validation error is null
to begin with, so the default value is
none and it'll only be set if any any of
these if statements actually hit. What
we'll do is just hop outside this and
say if validation error, then we'll
we'll set the error to be the validation
error and then
return. Otherwise, we can say set error
to null. So if it was currently set,
we'll just set that to null. And then we
can go ahead and fetch the gene
sequence. And then we can pass in the
start and the end position and then
update the dependency array down here
with the variables we depend on. So this
was this will be the start position, the
end position, the fetch gene sequence as
well as the gene bounds like this. And
we can then take the function
definition, hop down to where we're
going to need it. So on sequence local
request, just paste it in right there.
save. And now if I put in a number such
as seven right here. So now we should be
below the 10,000 base pairs and then
load. We see that something is at least
happening. If I drag this, it'll load
again. If I drag this, it'll load again.
If I drag this, it'll load. So it seems
to working just fine. Let me just check
the validation logic as well. So first
we can check whether we have a valid
start and end position. So if I drag
this all the way up and then make this
even smaller. So if I do this now, we're
10,000 free base pairs. Press load
sequence. Then we aren't really able to
see anything. So we don't really show
the error anyway any place right now. So
I'll just take this error being passed
down in gene sequence. So that comes
from the parent up here error. And then
we can go down and just show that
whenever it is actually there. So if I
just scroll down to right here and then
say if display
error then we'll put in a diff with the
display error. So the error right here
with the class name margin bottom four
rounded medium bg red 50 padding of
three text small and
text red 600. I'll just save that. And
now we can see that the selected range
exceeds the maximum view range. And this
is then calculated or determined that is
probably more correct way to say it in
the parent component. So if I just make
this a normal range again it should load
perfectly fine. And then for example if
I put in just a sd and say load sequence
please ins positions and we get another
number up here. So this all makes
complete sense. So the validation seems
to work fine. So while we're down here
in this code in the gene sequence I
would like to also just show the strand
information. So if you scroll up to the
parameter we passed down with the gene
detail hop into that we can see that we
have the strand right here. So to do
this so to use this we can show what
strand we're currently at. So what
strand we have the sequence from. So we
can say diff then we can put in a span.
This span should then show either
forward strand or reverse strand or
strand information not available if it's
not available. So first I'll say class
name margin bottom two flex items
center justify
between and text extra small. I'll then
just spell this correctly. Then for the
span I'll put in a new text color. So
I'll say
text and then for the color I'll say
hashtag 3C 4D or sorry 4F and then 3D
S70. And then put in the actual strand.
So what we can do is say if we have gene
detail dot genomic
info and then we can say
zero dot
strand. If that is equal to a plus sign
that means we have a forward strand. So
we'll go ahead and say forward
strand and this can be marked by
five 2 3. So this notation right here
five prime to three to three prime just
refers to the directionality of the DNA
strand and that is just a notation. So
unless we sorry if we do not have the
four strand well then we'll have the
other strand so the reverse strand. So
what I'll do is just say if I'll put in
another if statement as the as this
other case. So I'll just take
this and then check whether that is
equal to minus. If it is equal to minus
then we'll say reverse
strand and then put in three prime to
sorry I'll go ahead and do that and then
to five prime and if we are not neither
or sorry either plus or minus well that
means we probably don't do not have any
strand information available so I'll
then say strand
information not
available like this then just Save. So
we can now see that we do not have any
strand information available. I can just
go ahead and actually just print this
out just so we can see what it actually
contains. So if I refresh over
here, hop into a gene. We see that it
doesn't really print anything out at
all. So it means that we neither have a
plus or a minus. We don't really have
anything available under this. I'll just
put in the maximum window size as well.
So I'll copy this span start tag. Then
just put in
maximum window size and that is going to
be max view range to local
string and then it's in an amount of
base pair. So I'll just say base pairs
like that. So the flex up here within
the justify between will then spread
these apart. So the one is in the left
side and one is in the right side
because this flex div right here is the
full width of the entire box. So now we
can create the div for showing the
sequence itself. So, I'll hop down here,
put in another div, and then first I'll
put in some classes with full rounded
medium background E9 EA at 50. And then
I'll say P3. So, you see this black or
sorry, this dark gray rounded box up
here. Well, that is what is supposed to
contain the ATGs and C's themselves.
Then I'll put in a if statement. Well,
I'll say if is loading. Then we can then
we can put in a spinner. So if that is
the case, I'll go ahead and put in a
diff and the closing div as
well. Inside this div, I'll say class
name flex items center justify center py
of 8. Inside this div, I'll put in
another div.
This will then have the class names H5
width five animate
spin
rounded full border 2 border gray
300 border
T hashtag 3C 4F
3D. So I'll just click load up here and
then we see the spinner loading. And if
we're not loading we can go ahead and
show the actual sequence. So I'll put in
a diff. This is just going to be a diff
that prevents all the nucleotides from
overflowing and gives them a fixed
height. That means we can scroll up and
down in the height if it's more than
that specific height. So I'll say div
class name H 64. Then I can give this
will then be the fixed height. Then to
fix the height I'll also say overflow x
auto and overflow y auto as
well like this. Then because the
nucleotide just consists of letters,
we'll put in a pre-tag. This is just to
format these letters. We'll say font
mono text extra small leading
relaxed. We'll then just create a
function for generating all of these
atgs. For now, I'll just say atgc atgc
something. And then if there is an
error, I just want to be able to handle
that as well. So first I'll copy this
part right here. Put in another if
statement. So I'll say sequence data if
that is available we'll put in the
sequence data otherwise we'll put in a
paragraph so a p right here and then
I'll say if we have an error then I
would like to say error loading
sequence otherwise we can say no
sequence data loaded if that for some
reason isn't there I'll just say no with
a large capital letter class name text
center text small and then also So, a
text
color and the text color will just be
the one we usually do. So, the one up
here and then I'll just say /60. Okay.
So, right now the ATG ATS, G's and C's
are just hardcoded as you see right
here. But I want them to both be
clickable but also format in a specific
color such that every every single
nucleotide has its own color. And the
reason for wanting them to be clickable
is because the next card we are going to
build is for running a mutation anal
analysis on a specific position with a
specific nucleotide. This means that I
want to be able to click a specific
nucleotide and then that nucleotide
position will be in sorry inserted into
that card and then you just specify what
nucleotide you would like to change that
to before running the mutation analysis.
And this also means I'll create a react
component or just a little piece of HTML
with some React in it for each one of
these nucleotides that allows for being
able to click it. So that is what we'll
go ahead and do right now. So let's
scroll up to right where we start here
right in the JavaScript part. And then
we can create a function or actually a
variable that contains this formatted
sequence of nucleotides. So this will be
wrapped inside a use memo. And this also
means that rendering this entire list of
formatted nucleotides will only be done
when the when the dependency array
inside the use memo changes. So
hopefully not every time the component
rerenders otherwise. So I'll say const
formatted sequence is equal to use
memo and then we can pass in the
dependency array and then whenever the
variables inside this dependency changes
then this formatted sequence will be
rerendered again or sorry all the code
inside this formatted sequence will then
be rerun and then saved into this
formatted sequence variable and that is
then also what we're going to use down
here. So scrolling down to where we
hardcoded in these nucleotides, we'll
then just say formatted sequence. So
right now this just returns void. It
doesn't really return anything. So we
can just say go ahead and say return atc
for example and save. And now it says
atgc up here. So first things first,
we're going to need a sequence the
sequence data and also the sequence
range. So I'll say if not sequence
data and let me just say or not sequence
range then we'll return
null just to not do this. Then we'll say
con start is equal to sequence
range start. We'll then say const
basis per line and this will then be
150. So just a definition and this is
just how many nucleotides we want per
line so we know how to format it further
down in this code. Then we'll just
create a list containing all the lines
and this will then be a list of JSX
elements. So I'll say const lines
JSX
dotelement and we'll just need to import
JSX probably.
Yep. A list of those is equal to an
empty list. So now let's create a for
loop. So we'll say for let I be equal to
zero. And I would like to say if I is
less than sequence data.length in that
case we'll hop. So we'll do one
iteration in the loop that is bases per
line long. So let's say we have 1,500
nucleotides. Well in that case this loop
will then run 10 times because we jump
150 nucleotides at a time. This then
means we can chunk up the nucleotides
into chunks of 150 50 as well. So first
I'll say const line start position is
equal to start plus I. Then I'll say
const chunk is equal to sequence data
dot
substring to extract this substring or
this chunk from the sequence data. So
that's basically what I'm doing. Then
I'll say I plus basis per
line like this. Then we can say const
colorized jars to just contain the JSX
element of the actual colorized and
formatted jars. This will be a JSX
doelement and array of those equal to a
new empty array. Then we'll just loop
through this chunk. So I'll say for let
J be equal to zero. Then I can say if J
is less than
chunk.length then we'll say J++. So
we'll loop through all the different
nucleotides in this chunk. First we'll
get the nucleotide. So I'll say const
nucleotide is equal to chunk at position
j or I'll just put in an empty string.
If that is not there then we can say
const
nucleotide position is equal to
line start position plus j. And then I
would like to determine this color based
on what the nucleotide actually is.
solves a const color and then it is
going to be equal to sum some CSS class
like like text green 200 for example. So
we'll just create a function inside
utils for doing that. So I'll say new
file coloring
utils.ts. In here I'll say export
function get
nucleotide color class. We'll pass in
the
nucleotide which is just going to be a
string because it is a single character.
We'll return a string as well. And then
we'll just put in a simple switch here
that takes the nucleotide dot to
uppercase. This means it'll always be
uppercase. So we'll avoid confusion
about a lower and uppercase nucleotide.
That means it won't really match or
sorry that could cause not really
matching any of the cases inside this
switch. So I'll then say case a return
and then for the a we'll say text red
600 and then we can say case
t. If that is the case we'll then say
return
text blue 600 in
step and I'll just spell this correctly.
I'll just copy these two cases paste
them in right here. So we have A, T, G,
and C. And then for the C we'll go with,
oh, sorry, for the G we'll go with
green. For the C's, we'll go with amber.
And then we'll just have a default. So
if none of these are hit for some
reason, then we'll just return
text gray 500 like this. Then I can just
copy this function name, hop back in
here, and then just determine the color
based on this class. where we will pass
in the nucleotide itself. So now we have
a string containing cont containing the
CSS class that is required to color the
nucleotide in the HTML up here. So now
we can push the actual HTML to colorized
chars. So I'll say
push and I would like to push a span. So
just a string inside the span will have
the nucleotide. So just the letter and
we'll just put a key onto this as well.
So I'll say key and the key is just
going to be J. The class name is going
to first of all be a formatted string.
We'll put in the color because that is a
CSS class. We'll put in group relative
and cursor pointer. Save that. Then when
it is clicked, we can go ahead and say
on
click. And when it is clicked, we'll
just call the following function. So on
sequence click we'll pass in the
nucleotide position as well as the
nucleotide itself. And then when any of
these nucleotides up here is hover or
sorry are hovered then we'll need to
track that as well. So we can show some
kind of popup about the position of the
nucleotide we're currently hovering
because let's just say we have 10,000
nucleotides in this window and we can
scroll up and down and to the left and
to the right. It might be hard to
determine what position of this specific
nucleotide you actually currently
looking at. So by being able to hover
one and then seeing the position will
make it easier for the user to pick out
the specific mutation they would like to
test out. So under this drag start X
I'll create a new one. So I'll say const
hover position and then set hover
position is equal to use states and the
use state should be a number or null and
then I'll say null. This just needs to
be or instead of a comma. Now, this
hover position up here is to display or
sorry to know what to display in this
tool tip will show whenever we hover a
nucleotide. But we're also going to need
the mouse position. So when hovering up
here to know where to display the tool
tip on the page. So therefore, I'll just
say mouse position up here as well. So
I'll say mouse position and then set
mouse position as well. And the mouse
position, if I just define that, that
needs to be an x and i and a y value. So
I'll say X number Y number or null. And
this will just be null by
default. So I'll say on null right
there. Then I can scroll back
down. So right here. And first we can
say on mouse enter. So on mouse enter
like this. In that case we'll receive an
event. and we'll say set hover position
and we'll set that to the nucleotide
position. We'll then also say set mouse
position to x is going to be eventclient
x. So the mouse position x and y is
going to be e dot client y. So the y
position for the mouse. And we'll then
just do the same for the on mouse
leaf. And then in this case, we'll just
set both of these to null because we
aren't really hovering this nucleotide
anymore. Then after rendering this
entire line of nucleotides, we can then
say lines
push and then push the entire line. So
inside a diff. So I'll
say diff like this. Put in a key that's
just going to be AI and a class name
which is going to be flex. I'll put in
another div in here. I'll say class name
MR2 with 20 text rights. So this will
align the text on the right. I'll then
say text gray 500 and select none.
Inside this I'll put in the line start
position to local string. Right outside
of this I'll put in another div
containing the colorized characters. And
then I'll say flex one and
tracking wide like that. Now outside
this line push I can then say return
lines. So return lines. Save that. And
now we can see the line positions up
here as well as the colorized
characters. We can scroll to the right
or left. And we can scroll up and down.
So we just need to change a couple of
things for the dependency array because
right now this is only going to be rerun
and then updated over here the first
time the component is rendered. But we
would like these to be changed whenever
the load sequence is clicked for example
as well. So we'll need to say whenever
sequence data changes redo all of this.
Whenever the sequence range changes as
well redo all of this. And whenever
handle sequence uh let me just see what
it's called on sequence click. Whenever
that is called we'll need to redo all
this as well. So if I drag this now it
redo everything. So we can see it says A
right here as the first one. over here.
Now it says G. So it does update it as
it is supposed to do. If we make a very
small window of only 116, then we only
see this single line as well. And I see
this one error right here. It says text
gray as well. So we need to make it
actually gray by spelling it correctly.
I'll just make sure that I haven't left
out any of these or spelled these
correctly. So it looks like I spelled
these correctly there, there, and there.
So hopefully you didn't do this. That is
just me spelling incorrectly sometimes.
Cool. So now that we have this tool tip
up here, I would like to be able to
hover some of these and then use the
information stored from this formatted.
Let me just hover all the way up in the
gene sequence. Then use this information
we store in these set hover position
mouse position. So then also show the
tool tip because right now when we hover
something, nothing actually happens. So
hopping down here, we can render out the
tool tip based on this information. So
I'll just scroll down to beneath this
and then I can say if hover position is
not equal to null and mouse position is
not equal to null and then we'll render
out a diff. This div will have class
name pointer events none. It'll have a
fixed positioning set 50
rounded. We'll have background of
3C for ref 3D. We'll have px 2, py 1,
text extra
small. We'll have text white and shadow
medium like this. Then inside this div,
I'll put in the position text and then
also hover position to local string.
Just to save that. And then this should
also be positioned depending on where
the mouse is. So look at this. Right now
it is just positioned down here. But I'd
like this to move so it's right above
the mouse at all times. So what I'll do
is put in a custom style tag with an
empty dictionary. And then in here I'll
say top. So the top should be based on
the mouse position doy minus 30 just to
take account for its height. So now you
can see it aligns with the y position of
the mouse. We can then just do the same
for left to align with the x position.
This will then be
mouse
position.x. We can then just say
transform. So if I just comment out this
line, you can see why we need transform.
So right now it is in the middle of or
sorry it is aligned such that the mouse
is in the bottom left corner of this
label but I would like the label to be
right above the mouse in the center on
the x-axis. So I'll just move it half a
width to the left. And to do this I'll
say transform translate x. Now we'll
translate it by minus 50%. So half of
the width of the tool
tip. And then just save that. And now we
see it being positioned exactly over the
mouse along with the position of the
nucleotide as well. And lastly, we can
just make a little reference so the user
knows what nucleotide corresponds to
what color. So I'll put in a diff down
here.
Say class name in here. I'll then put in
another sorry I'll just put in MG3 flex
items center and gap form to space to
create some space between these
different nucleotides. will have 80, GNC
along with their respective colors. Then
put in another div like that. Then say
class name flex
items center and gap of
one. We can then also say div inside of
that. So I'll put in a div. And then
this div just needs to be a circle. So
just H3 width three and round it full to
make it a circle along with the color BG
red 600. We can then just pass in a span
as well. This will then be a. So now you
can see what I'm talking about. I'll
then say class name text extra
small text and then we'll use this text
color up
here. at uh
slash70. And I'll then just copy this
diff three more times. So A, T, G, and
C. And this uh C will then be
amber. The G is going to be green. The T
is going to be blue. So now we have the
annotations for the nucleotides as well
just to make it a little bit more
obvious why we color them in this way.
Before moving on I would like to just do
two things. First of all, as you can see
up here it says 999 base pairs. That's
because we have a small miscalculation
up here. So going
up to the current range position and
where it is being calculated. It should
be all the way up somewhere. I'll just
say range
per adjust range. then we should be able
to find it. So right here, if I put in a
plus one, we should be able to see the
range being calculated correctly. So
that was the first thing. Next, I think
I made a little bit of a spelling error
down here. So it says 4D instead of 3D.
So I'll say 3D and 3D just so we keep
consistent coloring around the entire
application. Cool. So just to summarize,
we're able to click these positions.
Right now it doesn't really do anything
because we haven't uh changed the gene
view to be able to handle that with this
on sequence click. But we are able to
load different sequences. So I can drag
around this slider. I can make it
smaller or larger. I can scroll around
inside of this window of our sequences.
I can manually change these as well like
this. Load a sequence. I can see error
messages. And we have some annotations.
So with that with that done I would like
to consider the gene sequence completed.
So, we can now hop back into the gene
bureau and then move on to the next
card. The next card is going to be a
card containing the known variants
within this gene that we're currently
looking at. This means that you can
either test out mutations on known
variants that currently exist to see how
EVO 2 performs against those variants or
you can click a position or nucleotide
like this and then manually test a
position that you would like to test.
So, those are going to be two options.
So, first we'll need to create this card
called known variance. And we'll do this
inside a new component. So, I'll hop
under components, say new file, and then
call this known
variance.tsx. Then I'll just say export
defaults
function known
variance and just leave the properties
empty for
now. And then I would like to
return just something like a rag
fragment until we have it implemented
like this. And then I'll just say
return import this. I'll make it a
client
component. In here I'll just place it
right above the gene sequence. So I'll
go ahead and say known
variance. Import it in save. And then it
should be up here right now. So the
first step in showing these known
variants is actually going ahead and
fetching them. And this will be done
inside the gene viewer since we might
need these known variants in other
components than just the known variance
component up here. So first I'll just
create the logic for actually fetching
the known variants. So under genome API
we can go ahead and scroll down and then
create a new function that can fetch
these known variants. So this will just
be called fetch clinbar variance. So
I'll say export async function
fetch clinical
variance variance like this. I'll pass
in the chromosome which is a string.
I'll pass in the gene bounce. So this is
where we search for variance in between.
This will just be gene bounds. I'll also
pass in the genome
ID which will also be a string. And then
what we will return is a
promise. Inside this promise, it will
resolve to a list of clinical variants.
So we'll just define these up here as
well. So we'll say export
interface clinvar
variant. It will contain a clinical
variant ID. This is going to be a
string. It'll contain a title, a
variation type. It'll contain a
classification as well as the gene
sort. It will contain a
chromosome, a
location, and then it'll contain a
couple more things probably which we'll
append if we do need them later on. So
going down here, we'll return a list of
these. So we'll say clinical variant and
then a list of those and then just open
up the function. To search for clinical
variance, we're going to need the
chromosome. The minimum and maximum
bound within that chromosome will search
the variance within. And then we can
build out the UL search parameters from
that. So first I'll just get the
chromosome in the way we're wanting it.
So I'll say chromosome formatted is
equal to chromosome.replace and I would
like to remove this ch or
chr text right here that is in front of
some chromosomes. And I so if for
example this is the chromosome it'll
remove this chr and just leave us with
the number 17. So I'll go ahead and say
replace and then I can put in a reax. So
I'll say forward slash then up and then
chr slash ii and then we'll replace that
with nothing. This will just replace
this chr with nothing. Then we can say
const minimum bound is equal to math
dominimum genebound dot minimum and
genebound dot
maximum. We can then also say
maxbound. This will then just be max
right here. Then if you hop into the
following URL right here, that is the
endpoint we're going to use. So we'll
use ncbi.nlm.nih.govern.
government slashclinical variance and
then
/doc/linking. So in here we can see what
we can use to search. So for the
chromosome which we are searching within
we'll need to specify either chromosome
position the 70 sorry 37 or 38 down
here. These are for the two assemblies
HD19 or
hg38. So I'll just hop down and say
const position field is equal to if the
genome ID is equal
to
HG19 then we'll
use chromosome position 37 otherwise
we'll use chromosome position 38 and
then we can construct the search query.
So I'll hop down and say const search
term is equal to a formatted string
where we put in the chromosome
formatted. I'll then put in chromosome
right after to live up to their
standards. So
chromosome and I'll then say
and the minimum
bound the maximum bound and then also
the position field. So I'll
say position field like that. The search
URL which we're using is going to
be defined as this. So it's going to be
https and then e utils. So we actually
use e utils up here already. So we can
just copy that. So we'll take this
entire part, copy it all the way down
here.
Then we can say const
search params is equal to new URL search
params. We would like to search within
the database called clinical var
variance. The term is going to be the
search term. The red mode is going to
be JSON and the red max is going to be
20. Then we can say const search
response will be await fetch where we
pass in
the search URL. So I'll say search URL
we'll pass in the search parameters
after this query parameter string or
sorry question mark. So this will then
be search params and this can be
transformed to a string with to string
like that. First we'll just check
whether for whether the response is okay
or not. So I'll say if not search
response do okay. Then we'll throw a new
error saying clinbar
search failed and then we'll put in plus
the search
response dot and then status
text. Otherwise we can say search
data is equal to await search
response dot JSON to just get the JSON
for the response then we can say if
there is no results. So if search
data e search results if that is not
there or each search uh e search results
do id list is not
there. We can then also say all the
length of this
list so
length being
zero. If that is the case, we'll then
also just say that okay, now we know
that there probably aren't any variants.
So we'll just return an empty list of
variants and also say
console.log and then no clinvar variance
found like that. If there are actually
variants, we can then get the variant
ids. So we can say const variant ids is
equal to this list right here of variant
ids. And then because we have the ids
but not the information about the actual
variants themselves, we'll need to go
ahead and create a new call to a
database again. So I'll copy this down
and then say summary URL and I can call
this summary params as well. So here we
can go ahead and say we remove red max
and then we'll pass in the ID that'll be
variant ids dot join and we'll join them
together with commas like this. So it'll
take the entire array of variant ids and
make that a string joined together by
these commas. And then we can use all
those variants ids to actually get the
information about the specific specific
variants instead of only having the ids.
We'll then just fetch in the same way as
done up here as well. So we can do the
exact same things. I'll paste this in
and then say summary URL and then
summary
params. And here it is going to be
summary
response. And then I can say fail to
fetch variant details. And then I'll
also say summary data. And that'll be
equal to summary
response.json. Now we can then create a
list of variants. So I'll say const
variance which is a clinbar variant list
and that'll be equal to a new empty
array. Then I can say if summary data
dot results
and summary data dot results do
uids then we can say
for const id of these uids in this list
then what we'll do is then say const
variant is equal to summary data dot
results
id and then
variants
dopush and then we'll push a new variant
to the list. So each variant will have
the clin ID which will just be ID. It'll
have a title. The title will be
variant.title title. We'll have a
variation type that is going to be
either
variant object
type or unknown if it is not
existent below this we'll need a oh wait
I'll actually just format this a little
bit so what this can be is it can return
single
nucleotide variant for example So
instead of this I would like to
transform this to single nucleotide
variant but this is uppercase this is
uppercase and this is uppercase. This
means that it'll look way nicer. So I'll
say a new line in the dot and I'll split
this text by spacing. So I'll have three
different elements in the array. I'll
have single, I'll have nuclear
nucleotide and I'll have variant. I can
then say map to loop through all of
these. So map I can I can then get each
word inside this map which will be a
string. This will then be mapped to word
dot character at position zero dot to
uppercase plus the rest of the word. So
I'll say word
slice one dot to lowerase. So the rest
of the word will then be lowerase. And
then I'll join all of these together. So
I'll say join by just regular spaces
again. Cool. So this will transform the
single nucleotide word into with upper
cases as I showed you just before. So
the next thing I would like to get is
the classification. The classification
will be
variant dot
germline
classification dot
description or unknown if it is not
there. We can then also get the gene
sort. This will be variant gene
sort or just nothing if it is not there.
We can then also get the chromosome
which is just going to be chromosome
formatted as well as the location. This
will be
variance dot location sort. If that is
there we'll then say pass
ins and we would like to pass the
variance dot location sort to local
string or
unknown like this. And it seems like we
have a small error. We just need to put
in a colon instead of the question mark.
Then I see a small error up here. It
says very ancient type. It needs to be
very Asian type. So I'll just hop up.
And then we can see
very ancient type. We just need to
correct this spelling issue. And then
hopping down. That should actually fix
that. And then this is also chromosome
and not chromosome. So I'll say
chromosome like this. and just scroll up
and fix that as well. So these are just
small spelling errors that is need that
just needs to be fixed for these
software to
work. Then I can just return the
variants. So I can return the list of
variants like promised by the method up
here a list of clinical
variants. Then hopping back into the
gene viewer, I would like to create some
states for tracking the both loading of
the clinical variance as well as the
error and then the clinical variants
themselves. So I'll say const clinical
variance
variance and then we'll set that as
well. So set clinical variance is equal
to use state
clinical variant. So just an array of
those. We'll set a empty array as the
default value. Then I'll just copy this
line and say Clint sorry is loading and
then just clinbar to keep it a little
bit
simpler. Then we'll say set is loaded
clinical variant again. Then this should
just be a boolean. So we'll just set
this to false because it is not loading
by default. Then we can just say
Clintvar error and set Clintvar
error. And then this will just be null
and can either be a string or null like
this. Then hopping up here we can then
import this just needs to be type. We
can then import the fetch clinical
variance as
API fetch clinical variance like this
because our method right here in the
gene viewer for doing this will probably
also be called something like fetch
clinical variance. So we'll just want to
avoid a name conflict. So scrolling down
we can then create a function for
actually fetching these clinical
variants. So I'll hop down and say const
fetch
clinical variant variance and then this
will just be equal to
a new function. So I'll go ahead and say
async
function. First I'll check whether we
have the gene chromosome and whether
gene bounds is available. Then we'll
return if they are not. Then we can say
set is
loading clinical
variance and we'll set that to true as
well as just reset any errors we might
have for the clinical variance. So set
clinical variance
error then we can try and fetch these
clinical variance. So I'll say try catch
catch the
error and I'll put in a finally as well
wherein we set
the is loading clinvar to false inside
the try I'll say const variance is equal
to awaits api fetch clinical variance we
pass in the gene chromosome the gene
bounce as well as the genome ID and save
that we can then set the clinical
variance
to be varants like this. And then if an
error happens, we'll just set the
clinical variant error
to be
filled to fetch clinical variance
variance like this. And if that happens,
I'll also just clear the clinical
variance. So set clinical
variance to an empty array like that.
And these clinical variants should then
be fed whenever the component loads. So
I'll say use
effect. And then I'll pass in a
dependency array only depending on the
gene
bounds and also the function itself. So
I'll go ahead and say fetch clinical
variance. Then I can say if gene bounds
are there then I'll just call this
function and fetch the clinical
variance. Now in here I would like to
just print out the clinical variance. So
I'll say console.log variance just to
make sure that we actually see
something. So hopping back variant
analysis first. We just need to go ahead
and remove this though because we don't
really want to depend on that. It might
cause it reloading a bunch of times over
here. I'll just
refresh open F12. Then we can see we
have an array of an empty array and then
no clinical variance found. If I try
some other var some other
genes, no clinical variance. What about
this one maybe? Still no. So what I did
was I looked into this and I found that
under genome API we made a small error.
So instead of e summary for both the
summary URL endpoint up here and also
for just searching in searching up the
clinical variance is not the greatest
idea. We need to use e search instead.
So for e search with e search you can
look up the ids of the clinical variants
and in the e summary endpoint URL you
can look up the expanded and more
detailed information about each clinical
variant. So I'll go ahead and just
search or sorry save that and then load
up an example over here. So I'll just
take the first gene and then just click
this array over here. So now we have all
of these different clinical variants. If
I go back and try the other
ones, we get no clinical var clinical
variance for that one. We do get
clinical variance for this one though
also for the fourth one. So we are
getting clinical variance now. So that
is a very promising sign for our
application. Cool. So with the clinical
variance fetched we can go ahead and use
them inside our new component known
varants in here. So first we'll define
the props. These will obviously include
things such as the clinical variance but
also functions to go ahead and refetch
the clinical variance if that is needed.
First we'll have refresh
variance. So refresh variance is going
to be a function called when the user
clicks a refresh button to just refresh
the refetch these variants. We can then
also pass down a function called show
comparison. So whenever a user clicks
the analyze button for a specific
variant then this function can be called
to display a comparison model for the
variant analysis results. So the refresh
variance is going to be a function
returning void and the show comparison
is going to be a function taking in
variant which is of type cleanar variant
and it'll return void as well. The next
one we're going to pass down is going to
be update clinical variant. So I'll say
update clinbar
variant and this is going to be a
function that can update the state of a
specific clinical variant in the parents
component list of clinical variants up
here. So this will just be a function
that takes the ID of a clinical variant
as well as the new
variant which will be clinvar variant.
It'll just return void as well. Then
we'll pass down the actual clinical
variance. So clinbar variants and that
is going to be a list of clinbar variant
is in an array. We'll also have is
loading clinical variant which will be a
boolean. We'll have clinbar error which
will be a string or null. There will
also be genome ID which will be a string
and gene which will be gene from search.
So the card itself which we'll return is
going to look like this. We'll first put
in a card
component and then we'll put in the
class
names gap zero. We'll put in border none
bg whites py zero and shadow medium or
sorry small like this. Then for the
card, it looks like we need to import
that. So if I hop in here and just
select the first one, we should be able
to see a card whenever we just pass down
the properties. So I'll hop in here and
just pass down the properties. So it
actually is fixed. So I'll do this. And
then refresh variance is going to um
call the fetch cleanar variance. The
show comparison we'll just leave as an
empty function for now. We'll implement
that later. The update clinvar variant
we'll also just create a function for.
I'll just hop up here under these
functions and just say const update
clinvar
variant. And remember this took a
cleanbar ID which is a string and it
took the updated
variant which is just a let me just say
just updated variant which is just a
clinbar
variant and then we can say set clinbar
variance and we'll first of all get the
current variance
And then we'll say current variance map.
So we'll loop all over all of these
variants. And then if we have a one
variant where the clinbar
variant matches the parameter. So the
one we're looking for right now, this
one up
here. Then we'll update that. So we'll
say updated variant. Otherwise we'll
just use the old one. And this one of
course just needs to be a normal equal
sign. So we pass in the ID of the
clinical variant we would like to update
along with the clinical variant that we
are updating. So all the new properties
in this clinical variant. Then we set
the clinical variants. To do this we
loop through each of these to recreate
the list with map. So map just returns a
new list based on the updates which we
define in here. So we just return the
old one if the clinical variant of the
current one in the we iterating over is
not the same as the clinical variant
we're looking for. Otherwise, we just
use the updated variant if that is
found. So that is the basic premise of
how this works. So we can scroll down
and just use that right
here like that. And then for the
clinical variance, we can say clinbar
variance is loading clinbar. We can say
is loading clinical variance. We can
also say clinical variant error. Genome
ID will just be genome ID. And the gene
itself can then just be gene. So now we
should be able to render out the card in
just a second. So over here I'll put in
a card header. The card header should
have the card title which should say
known variance uh in
gene from clinical variance. And then we
just need to import the card header and
the card
title. Save that. And then let's just
open this up and see if we can see it.
And now we can see the card. So first
the card header we'll put in flex flex
row items
center
justify between pt4 and padding bottom
two and for the card title I'll say
class name I'll then put in text small
I'll put in font normal and then text
#3d forf and then 3D
again and then I'll make this 3c
actually and then for slash70. So now
it'll look like this. Then we'll just
put in a button that allows us to
refresh the variance. So right next to
the car title, we'll then say button
import that. And then the text should be
refresh. And now we just need to style
that to make it look a little bit
better. So we can put in first of all a
variant that is going to be ghost. We'll
then put in a size that'll be small.
We'll then put in an on
click. The on click is going to be
refresh
variance. So this one right here. And we
just need to pass down all these
properties or sorry dstructure all the
properties. So that is what I'll just do
now by copying in each of these from the
list of
types. genome ID as well and then also
the actual gene. So now we can say
refresh variance and then we'll also
just disable it. So we'll say disabled
when is loading clinical
variance. I'll then hop back in here and
then say class name H7
cursor pointer text extra
small text and we'll just use this style
again add no I'll just say hover
actually and then
background then I can say E9
EAL
70 and then this is what we'll get up
here. And then when I click refresh, it
should refresh for a second and then be
available to be pressed again. So that
was the card header. Then for the card
content, what I would like to do is just
go ahead and say class name padding
bottom four. Save that. Inside the card
content, we can put in the error first
of all. So if there is a clinvar error
then I would like to render out this
diff right here where we say clinical
variant
error. So I'll just save that and then
say class name M margin bottom four
rounded MD BG red 50 padding three
text extra
small and then also text red 600 like
this. So we can just test it out with an
error. So let's say this is
just going to be a default value of
haha. And then in here we'll just pass
down nothing. So the
error, let me just remove
that. Oh, sorry. Let me just pass down
something instead. That is way easier.
So I'll just do this. Now we can see the
actual error. Clinical variant error. So
now we know it works. I'll just remove
this again. And then under the error we
can say if we're currently loading. So
is loading clinical variant. Then we'll
put in a diff. We'll then put in another
diff here with a loading
state. So this diff will be h5 with
five. Animate
spin. We'll also put in rounded full.
We'll put in a border of two and a
border
color. And this border color should have
3
C 4F. and then
3D at 30. And we'll put in a B
top with the same border color as well.
So this one right here for this div. So
the outer
diff. Oh, I think I have an error. We
need to just put in the end quotation
mark and then also a just a fragment or
something right there. So for the outer
diff, we'll put in a class name of flex
justify sensor and py8 to create some
spacing above and below this spinner
right here. So when I save that, we can
then just put in the loading. Set that
to true. Save that. And now we see the
loading state right here. So I'll just
say is loading
clinvar. And we do get an actual error
over here. So that is probably something
we want to take a look at a little bit
earlier. X is sorry failed to fetch. So
that might be because we're fetching a
little bit too often actually. So we
might want to put in some logic that
doesn't fetch too often. But let's just
take a look at that a little bit later.
All right. So moving on, hopping down to
if we're not inside the loading state.
So if we're not loading, well, we want
to show these clinical variants. So I'll
say if clinical variance.length length
is more than zero then we'll show some
rects otherwise we'll just show a rack
fragment from for now on and then inside
this div I'll give it a class name h 96
and then max h 96 as well and then I'll
say overflow y scroll this means that it
won't become larger than h 96 so this is
going to be this many pixels and if it
is larger than that then it'll just be
scrollable inside the box. Then we can
say rounded
MD border and then give it a border
color as
well like that and then I'll just say
forward slash5 and save that. So this is
going to be the box containing the known
variance. Inside this box I would like
to put in a table. So I'll say table
from UI table. So from
shhatsen inside this table I'll put in a
table
header. The table header should contain
a table
row and a table row should contain a
table
head and a table head should contain
variant for
example. So I'll just import the table
row. And then for the table header I'll
say class name
sticky top zero and set
10. Save that. Hop back in. And then
let's see if we can see the table. So
yeah. So now we see varian right here in
the top. And then for the table row,
I'll say class name
background E9 E A at 80%.
Hover. And then when we hover, we want
to change the color a little bit. So
I'll just say let me say 60 for example.
So it'll look like this. And that is too
little of a difference. I'll just put in
let me say 30.
So now we can also hover this table
header. For the head itself, we'll give
it some classes too. PY2 text extra
small
font
medium
text. And the text should then be the
same color as up
here. So that one right there. And now
we can just take this table header and
copy it three more times. We'll have a
type as well. and then also
clinical
significance and we'll have actions. So
these will be the four table columns
we'll have in our table. And then for
the table body we'll say table body and
I would like to put in I'd like to loop
through the clinical variance. So I'll
say clinical variance.m mapap variance
and then for each variant we can then
return a table
row. This table row should have a key
first and foremost. So I'll say key and
that'll just going to be
variants do clinical variant ID and then
also some table cells. So I'll say table
cell import that and I'll also just do
some styling. So I can say class name
border. It has to be out here. Class
name border bottom and
border. And I'll just take the same
color as we always use up here at 5%. So
the first table cell right here should
have class name py2. We then want to say
div variant dot title. Save that. And
then we have a little issue. So you see
we have this big red error. So sorry er
error. So we need to exchange these
yellow ones with normal braces instead
of curly braces. And that should fix
that error. Then if I save again, we
should be able to see the variant names
over here. So after the variant title
and I'll just style this. So I'll say
text extra small font medium and I'll
say text hashtag 3C for ref and then
3D at 70%. So it'll look like this and
be a bit smaller as well. And remember
we can scroll through the table like
this if it is larger than it is supposed
to be. Then we can just put in the
location. So I'll say div and I would
like to put in just the same classes
right
here in this div. But I'd like to also
just put in margin top one flex and gap
one and remove the font normal. So if I
save this and then put in a paragraph
saying
location and then I'll put in
variant.loation. Save that. Now I'll be
able to see the location as well. Then
up here I'll just remove this 71 to make
it a little bit more distinguished. And
then I can put in a link where you can
click and then be taken to the actual uh
variation itself if you want if you want
to. So I'll say button inside the button
I'll say view in clean bar. Save that.
And this is pretty ugly. So I'll say
variant and the variant should be a
normal link. Size should be small. The
class name should be H6.
Cursor pointer up. It should be
px0 text extra small. It should be
text and then d. So I want it orange 82
46. I then want whenever we hover it, I
should have the same text color right
here, but just toned down to 80 instead.
So when I hover it, it'll look like
this. And then you see how this location
and the link isn't aligned on the same
place on the Y-axis. Well, that is
because we need to put in an items
center to align items on the center on
the Y- axis. So when I save that, it'll
look way more aligned and way better.
Whenever this viewing clinv link is then
clicked, I would like to control that
behavior as well. So we can say on click
and then we can say window open. So we
open up a new link and this will be
https forward forward and then
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.go/clinvar/variation
slash and then we will insert the
variant the clinical variation ID like
this and we would like to open this as
blank as well. So we open it in a new
tab. So whenever I save that and hop
over here, if I click view in ClinVar,
that should open up that specific
clinical variation right here in a new
tab. So that seems to work fine as well.
And then we can also just put in a small
link here. So we'll say external link.
We can put in class name that'll be
margin lift one inline
block H2 and with two as well. So now we
have this massive link. So if I click
that, the entire thing will just take us
to the clinical variation web page. So
let's just create another table cell. So
I'll say table cell. In here, I'll just
put in the variant variation
type. And I'll put in some class names
py2 and text extra
small. So it'll look like this. Single
nucleotide variant. But there are also
deletions, duplications, insertions, and
other variants in a sequence that you
might experience. We can then just put
in one more table zone. So if I take
this and copy it down inside this one,
we can put in a div. This div should
contain the
variant.classification or unknown if
it's not there. So I'll just save that.
Make this a little bit larger over here.
And then we can see uncertain
significance, slightly benign,
pathogenic, etc. for each clinical
variant. Then I would like to color
these based on the significance. So
pathogenic should be red for example and
then likely benign should be green such
that it is more obvious to the user
which ones are most harmful and which
ones aren't. And using colors is a great
way to do this. So you can quickly
gather the information about which which
ones are in certain categories without
even thinking about it just because you
see the colors. So hopping down here
into this div, I can say class name and
I'll make this a formatted string. Then
we can put in width fits. We can put in
rounded, medium, px2 to create some
spacing on the x-axis, py2 to create
some spacing there as well. Text center
font
normal. So let me just hop
back, open this up. So right now there
is really nothing. So we need to put in
some coloring. And this should of course
be determined dynamically based on if
it's uncertain significance benign path
genic etc. So we'll hop into utils and
just create a function for that. So
inside coloring utils we'll create a new
function. So this one will be called get
classification color classes. So I'll
say export function get
classification color
classes classification is going to be a
string. So that that'll be the
classification right here for example.
So benign, pathogenic, etc. And it'll
return a string as well. These are going
to be the CSS classes to color this. So
first I'll say if not classification,
then I'll return bg yellow 100 and text
yellow
800. Then I'll say
const lowerase class is equal to
classification. 2 lowerase. Then I can
say if lowerase classes
includes pathogenic well then it is
pretty bad. So I would like to color
that red. So then I'll say return bg red
100 text red 800. Then I can say else
if. So else if lowerase class that
includes B9. Then I would like to just
color this green instead. So green and
green else I'll just
return bg yellow 100 and text yellow 800
as well. I'll save that. Copy the
function name. Hop back into known
variance and then we can plop this
function in right here. So I'll go ahead
and do this and then pass in. Let me
just import this function though and
then we'll just use
variant dot classification. Press save.
And now we see the coloring. So likely
benign pathogenic is yellow though. So
we just need to fix that. So hopping
into the function again. So I'll just
click this one. Press F12. We should be
able to see that. Oh, this needs to be
text. And I also let me just save that.
And I also need to spell it correctly.
So this needs to be
patho genic right here. So now it is
colored correctly. So pathogenic is red.
The uncertain is yellow. Otherwise
they're green if they are likely benign.
Good.
Then under actions over here, I would
like a button where you can press
analyze with EVO 2. And then it'll
compare the result from analyzing this
mutation with EVO 2 to what was the
result of the or sorry, what is the
actual clinical significance of the
clinical variant. So when you click over
here on analyze with EVO 2, then
hopefully EVO 2 also predicts that it is
likely benign, but then you can at least
compare the EVO 2 result with the
clinical significance. So to store the
results of the EVO 2, I would like to
hop into the variant clinical variance
over here and then let me just find out
where that definition is. So I would
like to add a property called EVO 2
result and that should be optional. So
it doesn't come from the API but it's
something we can attach later on when
EVO 2 has predicted some result. So this
EVO2 result is going to contain a
prediction which will be a string. It'll
contain a
delta score which will be the number. So
that is the number we saw from the back
end that we calculated. It'll also
contain a
classification
confidence which will be a number as
well.
Then I would like to also just have is
analyzing that'll be a boolean that is
optional and I'll have evo 2 error which
is also be optional and then be a
string. This means we can show the data
on a row basis whenever EVO2 is both
analyzing and when it has analyzed. So
scrolling down we can then use this data
right here. So if EVO2 has analyzed the
current variant in the table, I would
like to create if statement for that. So
I'll say variant. Evo2
results and then and diff class name
MT2. I'll put in another div into this.
This should have the class name that is
a formatted string. So I'll put in flex
with fits.
I'll put in items center gap one rounded
medium px2 py1 text center and I would
like to put in the get classification
color classes and this should be based
on the evo 2 prediction result. So this
will be variant evo2 results dot
prediction because evo 2 is also going
to predict either benign or pathogenic.
Inside here, we'll put in a little
shield icon. This shield icon will just
have a class
name of hide free and width free like
this. And we'll just need to import
that, I think. And under this, we can
put in a
span. This span will just contain evo
2 along with the prediction results. So
a forced spacing and then I'll just say
variant. Evo2
results dotprediction like that and then
just press save. So it would look
something like this. If we just have to
test it out, this would then be uh B9
for example. And in here this would then
also be
B9. So it would look like this. So you
have the uncertain significance from the
actual database and then you have the
prediction from EVO 2 and then we can
compare these two directly like this.
Good. So that is what we would expect to
see whenever it runs in real life. Then
under this table cell right here we'll
copy
that put in a new one with a div first
and foremost with the class names flex
flex column items end and gap one. So
currently if EVO 2 has not been analyzed
for this specific row, I would like to
show a button that says analyze with EVO
2. If the EVO 2 analysis has been run,
then there should be another button that
says compare results. When clicking this
button, it should open up a modal where
the results or sorry where the
difference between the actual database
results and then EVO 2 results can be
compared. And then if you just click the
analyze with EVO 2 button and it is
loading then it should change the button
state button state to be analyzing
instead of analyze with EVO 2 and the
analysis with EVO 2 should also only be
available for single nucleotide
variants. So our only our back end with
model which we created only allows for
analyzing mutations with single
nucleotide variants. It does not allow
for deletions, duplications, insertions
etc. This can be created pretty easily
but right now we only support these
single nucleotide variants. So we also
only need to show the buttons in rows
that says single nucleotide variant. So
that is what we'll do. Let's go ahead
and implement these different cases and
get started. So first we'll say variant
dot variation type and then we can say
dot2
lowerase dotinccludes and then we only
want to show these in rows that says
single uh
nucleotide. So if this is the case then
we'll show some HTML otherwise we'll
just show null. So that is the first
case. This filters the buttons away from
all rows that aren't um single look type
variance. So we have put in H1 for
example and say
hello like this. Then we can see that
this hello is only in front of the
single nucleotide variant rows. The next
statement we're going to you we're going
to uh to base our ren off of is whether
evil 2 has already been ran or not. So
we'll put in another statement. So we'll
say not
variant evo 2 results. So if EVO2 has
not run, we'll create a button. So we'll
say analyze with EVO 2, something like
that. Otherwise, we'll create a button
that says compare
results. So I'll just put in a button up
here as well. So I'll say button and
button here. So because we haven't run
EVO 2 with any of these, they're all
going to say analyze with EVO 2. So that
matches what we're expecting. If I
remove this uh negation sign and save,
now they say compare results. I just
need to say compare results instead of
ts though. Then inside this button, I'll
create another if statement. I'll say if
variant is currently analyzing. Then
we'll go ahead and
say
span. Oh, I'll put in a span. And this
is going to be the loading state. And
then I'll say let me just remove this
and oh sorry let me just add
analyzing next to that dot dot
dot otherwise we'll need to put in an
else statement and here we'll also
return some red fragment in here we'll
say seap so put in a seap icon from
lucid
react and then we can say analyze
with evo 2 and I'll just move this text
outside the zap button
So it'll look like this right here. And
then inside the set button, I'll say
class name
MR1. I'll put in inline block H free and
width free as well. And then we can just
style the general button up here too. So
I'll say class name and then first of
all I'll say
variant outline. I'll say size
small for the button. Then we can say
the class name over
here. The class name should be H7. It
should be
cursor pointer. It should be border
hashtag 3C for F
3D at 20%.
Background E9 E A
PX3 text extra small
text add 3C 4 D sorry 4F
3D and then whenever you hover
it then we'll change the background just
a little
bit. So I'll just do this and change it
to 10. So now the button is going to
look something like this. And the button
should obviously be disabled whenever
the variant is currently analyzing. And
then when you do click the button, we
say on
click and then we call the analyze
variant function which we'll go ahead
and create in just a second. So right
now I'll just say
analyze variant and just copy this right
here or sorry comment out this because
we haven't really implemented the
analyze variant method yet. Then let's
just design this is analyzing. So I'll
just um copy this line and set it to
true instead. This way we can say see
what it is going to look like whenever
we're analyzing. So when analyzing we'll
have class name MR1
inline block H3 with free animate
spin rounded full border two border and
then we'll just use the same
color at
30%. Border
top same color again like this. So this
is going to be how the an analysis state
is looking. So I'll just set this to
true as well. So it'll be disabled. So
this is how it's going to look whenever
evil 2 is analyzing. Cool. Then I'll
just go ahead
and say bring this back to normal. So
this needs to be commented in
again. And this needs to be removed. And
then down here at the bottom, we'll say
variant
outline size
small class
name and the class name should be
something like and let me just go ahead
and test it out. So if I remove this
negation sign, we can then see the
compare button or compare results
button. So the class name should be
H7
cursor pointer. We should have border
green
200 bg green 50 px3 text extra small
text green
700 and when it is hovered we say bg
green 100. So if I save that, we can see
a green comparison results button. And
then I can just put in a bar chart two
as well. And this should have a class
name. So MR1 inline
block. Let me just do this correctly.
Class
name and then
MR1 inline
block H free with free. And I can just
import this from Lucid React. So the
compare results button is going to look
kind of like this. And when clicked, it
is going to call the show comparison
function from the parent. So on click,
we'll say show
comparison and pass in the variant like
this. And now that that is done, I'll
hop back up and bring back the negation
sign right here because we haven't
really analyzed these with EVO 2 yet. So
right now they do nothing. So we can
actually go ahead and create this method
called analyze variant and just get this
done. So we can use this both here but
also in the next card where a manual
analysis can be run by putting in the
position for example by clicking one of
these and then putting in the mutation
you would like to change it to. So I'll
say const
analyze variant is equal to async. So
when you analyze a variant you pass in
the variant which is clinbar
variant. Inside this function we can say
let variant details be equal to null.
The position of the variant we can get
from the location right here. So as you
see it includes some commas. So what we
can do is say const position is equal to
variant.loation. If we can pass it to an
integer. So I'll say pass int and say
variant.loation location
dotreplace and I would like to replace
commas with
nothing then we'll use that otherwise
we'll just set it to null and now we
should then have the position as an
integer or null over here then we can
say const riff alternative match is
equal to variant title dot match and I
would like to match with a specific reax
so I'll say front forward slash and then
if you see up here at the single
nucleotide variance. This is going to be
the title. So from this title we can
then find out both what the reference
and what the alternative is. So right
here we have the reference and then
right here we have the alternative. So
this is what was before the mutation and
this is after the mutation. So we'll
need to capture both the reference and
also the mutation. And the way we can do
this is with a reax. So this is going to
be a capture group. will capture a
single word. And then we can also use
the sign right here, the larger than
sign. That lets us know that we have the
reference and then the alternative. So
I'll go ahead and do this and then put
it in another capture group. Say capture
another word and then end the reax. And
then from this captured riff and
alternative, we can go ahead and extract
them. So I'll say if ref match
and ref alt
match dot length is equal to three. Then
we can say variant details is equal to a
new dictionary where we have the
position. We have the
reference which will be
ref match one and the
alternative will be ref match two. So
that is what we capture inside these
capture groups right here defined by
these braces. So what this reg reject
does is that it just looks for a pattern
like this. So a pattern where you have a
word then you have this larger than sign
and then you have another word and then
we'll be able to to extract the things
that we defined by the capture groups.
So now that we have done this we just
want to make sure that we have captured
what we need. So I can say if notvariant
details or not variant details.position
position. Let me just copy this. Oh,
sorry. Or not variant position reference
or notvariant positional alternative. If
that is the case, we'll just go ahead
and return immediately because we don't
really want to move forward with the
function. If this data is not correct,
then we can update the clinical variant
um in the parent. So, we'll
say
variant dot clinical variant ID and we
would like to update it too. We'll keep
all properties and then we would like to
update the is analyzing to true for this
specific clinical variant. This means
that in the parent or in the list of
clinical variants for this specific
clinical variant which we're analyzing,
we'll set the is analyzing property to
true. And this lets us update the
loading state such as the one over here
inside the button. Cool. So under this
we can say try. Inside the try, I'll
just put in a catch as well.
So inside the try what we'll do is first
of all analyze the variant with our API.
So we'll need to just go ahead and hop
into the genome API and create the meth
method for doing that. So I'll say
export asynchronous function analyze
variant with
API. I would like to pass in a
position which is the number alternative
which is a
string. I would like to pass in the
genome ID which is also a string as well
as a chromosome which is a string. Then
I can just take these four properties
and dstructure
them like
this and just use commas instead. Then
what I'll do in here is say we are going
to return a
promise. So this promise is going to be
an analysis results type. So I'll just
hop up here and create that type which
we'll return and that is just a type
that is returned from the model API
which we created. So I'll say export
interface
analysis results and this will then
be position
number reference which is going to be a
string. We'll have the
alternative which will be a string. So
these are two nucleotides and that is
the position where the single nucleotide
variation happens. Then we'll have the
delta score which will be the number.
We'll also have a prediction that will
be a string two and we'll have
classification and
confidence and that'll be a number. So
I'll just save this and then scroll all
the way down and then we can return that
type. So I'll say analysis results and
then inside the method we can first
create the query parameters for using
our API. So I'll say const query params
is equal to new URL search params where
we pass in the variant position that is
going to be position to string. We'll
pass in the
alternative which will be alternative.
We'll pass in a genome which will be the
genome ID. And we'll pass in the
chromosome which will just be
chromosome. And then for the base URL of
the API endpoint we're calling, I'll get
that by hopping into modal and just
copying this base URL right here. So
I'll copy this string hop back and then
I'll go into my env. So my environment
variables file and then I'll say next
public
analyze single variant base URL and this
will be equal to the string which we
just copied. I'll copy this uh name of
the environment variable file
environment variable hop into the
environment.js and then I'll define it
under client right here. So I'll define
the name and then down here I'll paste
in right there and right there. This
will let us access our environment
variables in a type safe way and this
will also ensure that our environment
variables are actually there whenever we
build our application. So the URL can
now be constructed. So we can say con
URL is equal to a formatted string where
we pass in the environment variables. So
we can import that from right here. dot
next public analyze single variant base
URL and we'll then use
the query parameters to string and
append that to the base
URL. Then we can under that call the
URL. So we'll say con response is equal
to a weight fetch. We'll fetch the URL
with the method
post like this. Then we can say if not
response okay then we can say const
error text is equal to a weight
response.ext and then we'll throw a new
error where we say
field to analyze
variant and this depend on the error
text. Otherwise, if the response is
okay, we just return awaits
response.json and this will just be
returned as this analysis result type.
So that is what we can expect to receive
in here in known variance. So now we can
go ahead and call that. So I'll say
const data is equal to a weight analyze
variant width API. We'll pass in the
position that'll be the variant details.
Let me just
see. Then we'll say alternative which
will be variant
details dot alternative. We can then say
genome id which will be genome ID and we
can say chromosome which will be gene.
chromosome. So this should then call our
back end in modal and then do the
analysis of the mutation from already
known clinical variants. And then after
this has been done, we can go ahead and
update the variant to remove the loading
state again. And then I also attach the
EVO 2 result such that we can show the
button that says compare results for
example. So I'll say const updated
variant. This will be a clinical variant
and that'll be equal
to the variant. So this will dstructure
all the props of the current variant
into this dictionary. And then we would
like to update is analyzing to false.
And we'll add this new property evo2
results. And this will be equal to the
data. And now we can just call the
update clinical variant with the
variant dot clinical variant ID as well
as the updated clinical variant right
here. So I'll just say updated variant
and updated variant. Then we can call
the show comparison to show the model
with the updated variant. And then if I
just take this update clinical variant
and paste this into the catch as well.
I'll just take the try statement
actually and wrap that around because we
didn't really do that yet. So I'll wrap
it around. So it tries to the try
statement contains analyzing the variant
with the API. So this involves fetching
some external data source. So this means
I'll just wrap this in a try just to
make sure that we can handle if it
fails. Then I'll take this update
clinical variant put it into the catch
statement and then I'll just copy this
part where we created the updated
variant and then if the fetching fails
then the EVO 2 result is not going to be
there and is analyzing will be false but
we will attach the EVO 2 error. This is
going to be if
error is instance
of an error then we'll put in error dot
message otherwise we'll just say
analysis failed and then we can just
call this error instead and then it
should work. So if I now hop over here
and just refresh the
page, click try BC1 example and then we
select a single nucleotide variant. So
this one is slightly benign. Let's try
and click analyze with EVO 2 and just
see what
happens. So I think we need to add this
analyze variant. It is actually unused
to down here. So I'll just do that
comment in again and then add these two
braces under analyze variant. We'll just
need to pass in the variant as well. So
I'll do this. Then over here if I now
click analyze with EVO 2, we see the
analysis getting started. If I click the
network tab, we should be able to see
the external API being called
too. So let me just click network. Then
right now a pending request is being
handled. Then under here we should be
able to see something being called. So
we see pending right here. So it did
call our endpoint and now we just need
to wait for it to finish. It does have a
cold start and having to load in all of
the model file into the memory of the
GPU. So it will take a little while for
the first time. I will come back
whenever this is done. So it just
finished and now we also able to see let
me just close here that EVO 2 classified
it as likely pathogenic and then the
single nucleotide variant is actually
likely benign. So there's a difference
between these two. Right now if I click
compare results nothing happens. So we
can't really see a model showing the
confidence etc. So that is probably the
next thing I would like to implement. If
I click analyze with EVO 2 again then
hopefully it is a little bit faster this
time because everything has been loaded
into memory. So there are no cold
starts. Let me just click the rest of
the examples down here. This one, this
one and this
one. So EVA 2 predicts likely pathogenic
for all of these. So this makes me think
that there is an issue. So hopping into
F12. Let me just see what the requests
actually contained.
If I go ahead and just do this again. So
I hop into this
one and just analyze these with EVO
2, we can just check what the request
contained and see whether this was
correct or not. So I'll say payload and
then the genome seems correct,
chromosome seems correct, alternative
seems correct, but the variant position
is not correct. So as you see right
here, it says
4392. So this is only the first five
characters of the actual location. But
really it seems like it filled it away
this last part which is obviously also
part of the location. This means that
the request probably can't find the
correct or sorry the evil 2 model or
sorry the back end in model probably
can't find the correct sequence for
because this location doesn't even exist
within the chromosome. So we'll just get
some random response back like like the
pathogenic. So if we hop into model for
example and then click one of these
requests what we can see is that it
fetch the genome sequence and because
the location is just some random
location that doesn't exist we get nnnn
which is just a sequence of characters
that doesn't exist it should be atgc's
so this will obviously give a score that
is very harmful from evil 2 because it
has never seen this before so we just
need to fix this it seems like a pretty
easy fix that that we need to do we just
need to make sure that this extra free
numbers that are part of the location is
part of what is being sent to EVO 2. So
I looked into this for a couple of
minutes and what I found is that
whenever analyze variant is called this
replace replaces the first comma with
nothing but if you want to replace all
commas and there are two commas in the
location if we take a look. So there are
one two commas we'll need to say replace
all. So if we replace this replace with
replace all and then save then we can
run the analysis again. So I say analyze
with EVO
2 and then if I check the request right
here then we see that the full uh baron
position is sent with the request. Now
if I do this for the rest of these
examples this one this one this one then
EVO 2 will say likely benign for most of
them likely benign probably also right
here. Then if I go back to results, we
can test some other ones as
well. Let's see if we can find some
pathogenic mutations. So these ones are
likely pathogenic. So we'll just analyze
these four. Evo 2 predicts likely
pathogenic, likely
pathogenic,
B9 and B9. So it is surprisingly
accurate actually from the results that
we have used. So that is very cool.
Hopping into variant analysis in modal.
Here we can just check out what it
prints out. So as we can see now it
prints out the actual sequence which it
found right
there and a different sequence right
here and then a different sequence down
here. GC different one down here as
well. So this means that it it is
working as it's supposed to do right now
which is great for us. Cool. So let me
just close down the terminal or F12. The
last thing I just want to do here is
putting an empty state or put in an
empty state. So right here we see that
there are no variance in the gene. So I
would like this to be shown a little bit
nicer. So down here, this is what checks
if the length of clinical variance is
more than zero. So if we hop down, we
can just put in an empty state. So this
is going to be a diff. Inside this diff,
we'll put in a search
icon. Inside this search icon, let me
just do that. We'll say class, I just
need to import it. Then I'll say class
name
MB4, height of 10, width of 10, and then
text
gray 300. Inside the diff, I can then
also Oh, right below this, I'll actually
go ahead and say no clin bar variance
found for this
gene. And now we can at least see this.
And we just need to style it. Then I'll
say I'll write this in a paragraph first
of
all. This paragraph should have the
styling class name text small leading
relaxed. So text small and then we can
just center things. So I'll say
flex. This is kind of annoying. I'll say
flex and then height 48. flex column
items uh
sensor just save that. Now it senders
things a little bit then we can say
justify sensor as well. We can say text
center and we can say text gray 400. So
this will be our empty
state and then if I go into something
that has clinical variance then it'll
load exactly like it's supposed to do.
All right. Right. So, one more thing I
just want to add is just an icon for
this refresh button over here. So, if I
hop in, I'll just say refresh and then
CV as the icon and then I can take class
name and then do something like MR1 H3
and with three as well. If I save that,
now we have a nice looking refreshed
icon as well. That should be it for the
known variance component. And the next
step is going to be creating this
comparison model that where where the
button shows up for when you click
analyze with EVO 2. So it says uh
compare results right here. So that's
the button we see whenever you run the
analysis. This will then call the show
comparison function passed down from the
parents. So show comparison is not
implemented yet. So this should be a
model which we implement right here in
the parent and then this can be shown
with the new prediction from EVO 2
whenever it is clicked. So let's go
ahead and do that. First, if we hop
inside the gene viewer viewer and then
scroll all the way up to the states, I
would like to create a new state. I
would like to call this state comparison
variant. So, I'll say const comparison
variant and then also set comparison
variant. This will be equal to use
states and it'll store a clean bar
variant or null if the comparison has
not yet been done or sorry if the model
should not be shown. So the variant
stored inside this use state is the one
that should be stored within the
comparison model. And this one we can
create down here as a component for
itself. So I'll hop under the explorer
file explorer. Then go under components
and create a new file. This file should
be called
variant
comparison
modal.tsx. Inside this one, we can then
export a component corresponding to that
name. So I'll go ahead and say export
function variant comparison
model and then for the properties I
would like to receive we're going to
have
comparison
variant and this will then be a clean
bar variant or null if it should not be
shown and we'll also receive the on
close. So what happens when you click
the close button and this should then
probably clear the comparison variant in
the parent state. So I'll then just say
void except these or sorry dstructure
these open up the function and then
first we would like to not show this
comparison model if these are not oh
sorry if the result is not here in this
variable. So I'll say if not comparison
variant
or not comparison variant evo2 results
then we'll just return null. So this
will just render nothing. Otherwise we
can go ahead and render out the actual
variant comparison model. So this will
first of all be a diff. I'll say fixed
as class name.
I'll say insert zero, set 50, flex items
center, justify center,
bg 50%. And a padding of four. Inside
this, I'll just put in an H1 that says
hello. Then I can take this varing
comparison model, hop back into the gene
viewer, and then we can paste it in
right here. So we'll just import this
component at the import as well as G
properties. So comparison variant will
be comparison variant. And whenever the
close button is clicked inside the
variant comparison model, we'll go ahead
and set the comparison variant to true.
So I'll say set comparison variant.
Sorry, not to true. Set that to null.
This means that it'll no longer be
rendered because as you see in here, if
it is null, we'll just return null. So
the comparison variant model will not be
rendered. We can then also just scroll
up here and then create the function
that we can use to actually show this
model whenever it is clicked right here.
So under known variants, if the show
comparison variant model is clicked. So
if the button over here is clicked that
says compare results, then it'll show
that by setting the comparison variant
right here to a to a value. So it'll be
shown. So I'll go ahead and say const
show comparison.
This will be equal to a function that
receives variant which is a clean
variant. We'll then say if
variant dot evalo to result. So if we do
have a results then we can say set
comparison variant set that to the
variant compare sun then we can paste
that in down here. So I'll just paste in
the function like this. And then if I
hop in here and
then just refresh the
page, then we can just try out an
example. So I'll just try out this
example right here. Pick the first one
and then we can do an analysis. This one
for example. I'll just wait for this to
finish. So it just finished. And then as
soon as it finished, I saw this overlay
right here. So that is what we just
created inside the varison compar sorry
varant comparison modal. So we see this
overlay as well as hello. And then we
just need to create an actual overlay.
So a white card on top of this grayed
out background with a close button. So
you can go ahead and close it again if
you want to. Now first I'll just replace
this hello with a
div and close that div as well. I can
then say class name put in a max height
of 90 viewport width. Sorry viewport
height. So I'll say 90 viewport height
like that. Then I can go ahead and say
width
full. And then I can say max width free
Excel overflow Y auto rounded
um large and then BG whites and then
I'll just create a header for this model
which we're creating. So I'll put in a
div. I'll then just say modal header.
Make that a comment. Then I can put in a
class name border bottom border # 3Z
4F 3D at 10 and then a padding of five.
And I'll just need to spill this
correctly. So border bottom and then
padding five like this. And now we see
the white box which we were hoping to
see. Inside this we'll just create the
text. So first I'll create a container
for the text and the button to close it.
This container will have the class names
flex
items center and
justify between. Inside this, I'll just
put in first of all some text. So I'll
put in H3. So a heading tag that isn't
the largest one, but still a pretty
large one. I'll say varants
analysis comparison. Put that in. Then
we'll just style that a little bit. So
I'll say text large font medium and text
and just put in this color right
here. So it'll look like that. Then I'll
put in a button as well to actually
close the model. Again I'll just import
the button and then
say on
click. So when you dual click it I'll
just call the unclo function that will
nullify this set it to null and then
therefore not show the model anymore.
Then I can say X as an icon. So we can
import this X icon from the seed react.
So it is going to look like this when we
save it. And then we just need to make
it a little bit nicer. So first I'll say
variant ghost. I'll say size small and
save that. Then we can just define a
size right here. So I'll say height
five, width
five. And we can put on some classes
right here. So I'll say class
name, height of seven, width of seven,
cursor pointer. So right now when you
hover it, you don't really see the
cursor change. When I save and we put on
cursor pointer, we do see the cursor
change now to indicate that there is an
action by clicking this right here.
Cool. Then we can say padding zero. And
we can say
text and putting put in the usual text
color. So this one. And I'll say at 70%,
and we can put in hover. So whenever we
hover, we say BG E9 E A at 70%, and we
can say hover
text. And then just put in the regular
text again. So I'll put it in right
here. So it'll look like this. And then
whenever we hover it, we can see the
text change the color a little bit
indicating the action. So that is
exactly what I wanted. And then for the
modal content, I'll just say modal
content. We'll put in another div. In
here, we'll say class name padding five.
And we'll then put in an if statement.
So we'll put in a conditional where we
check whether the comparison variant.
And oh, and comparison variant. Evo2
result is there. If it is, we'll render
out a diff.
This div right here should have class
name space y six. I'll just save that.
And then we can start by putting in some
variant information. So I'll put in a
diff to store
this. So I'll then say class name
rounded
medium. I'll put in a border a border
color. So just this one up here again at
10. I'll also put in a background color
E9 EA at 30%.
And I'll put in a padding of four. So
it'll look like this. Inside this div,
we can go ahead and put in an H4. So
kind of a heading like we did with H3,
just smaller. I'll then say variant
information. Save that. Say class name.
And then margin bottom free text
small font medium. And I'll put in a
text color as
well. This text color is going to be
this one.
And I'll save that. And now we have a
box to store the variant information in.
I'll then go ahead and create a grid
with two different columns. So I'll say
div. Inside this div, we'll put in the
class names grid and then gap 4. On
medium, we'll say grid columns 2. Inside
this, we'll put in a diff for each item
in the grid. So for the left and the
right column. So this will be for the
left one or the first one. Inside this,
I'll just copy this
div. Inside this, we'll put in another
one where we say space Y2. We can then
put in another div in here. And this
should have the class flex. Inside this,
we'll put in a span that says position.
So when I save that, it'll look like
this. We can then just copy this span
right here and then put in the location.
So I'll go ahead and say comparison
variant.loation. Save that. And now we
have the location as well. Then we can
just format the span
text extra
small. And for the position, we'll also
give it text extra small. We'll give it
width 28. And then then also this text
color up
here. So I'll paste this in and say at
70%. So that is going that is what it is
going to look like right here. apart
from the position right here. I'll just
copy this one and then create another
one for the type. We can then say
comparison variant dot variation type.
Save that. And now we have the type as
well. And then what I would like to do
is just copy this diff right here all
the way down to there. And then at this
position, I'll just put in three more in
diffs. I think two is the correct
amount. So now we have the second column
in the grid. And this one should be
called variance.
In here, I'll then just show the variant
in its correct color. So, what I'll do
is show something like a and then 2 a t.
So, it's going to look like this. And
then with the correct color for both a
and t. And then I'll also just style
this to be font mono. So, it'll look
like um we saw earlier on. So, first I
would like to match the reference and
also the variant. So what you see right
here, the reference and the variant from
the title. So we'll hop into comparison
results again. And then we'll just use
the same reax as we used before. So we
can go ahead and just do a solutionwide
search and say match. And then we should
be able to find the same reax. So this
one right here. I'll just copy this one.
Hop back into varing comparison. And
then I would like to do the following.
I'll put in curly braces first. Then
I'll put in a normal set of braces. Then
I'll define a function inside of this.
And this function we can we can then
execute like this. This means that we
can return some code inside this
statement which will then be rendered
out. So let's say we just say
return and then H1. Well then this H1
will then be rendered out like this. And
this then allows us to match the actual
or sorry to run the reax inside of the
code instead of having to do it all the
way up here. So this just makes it a
little bit more concise in the code. So
we can then say const
match and then we would like to match
the comparison variant title. Then we
can just extract the reference and the
alternative. So we'll say
if match and
match.length is equal to three. Then
I'll say
constiff alternative is equal to match.
Outside of this, we can then say return
a React fragment. In here, we'll put in
a
span. And we'll just need to remove this
other return statement and save this.
This span should have the ref. So, I'll
just go ahead and include this return
statement in here. And then if the
return statement is not or sorry, if the
if statement is not true, then we'll
have to return something else. So, I'll
just say return comparison
variant.title like that. So I think we
messed up the braces a little bit. So
I'll just make sure we don't do that. So
right now we need to take this entire
return statement, put it inside the if
statement and then down here we can then
say return comparison variant dot title
like this. So the first span is going to
be the ref. The second span is going to
be this symbol right here. So it'll be
becomes and then we can also show the
alternative right there. So it'll look
like this. And then we just need to
actually go ahead and color these. So
what I'll do is just use the function we
created inside utils the coloring utils.
And then we can use that to get the
class name. So I'll say class
name call this function just import once
and then also call it with ref like
this. And then I'll just force this to
be
true. And then I'll do the same for the
second span down here. So it'll look
like this. And this just needs to be
old. So now we have the correct coloring
as well. A to
G. And now that we also show the
reference and the variant, I would like
to also just create a link that you can
click to actually hop into the variant.
So down here, I'll put in a another div.
I'll just need need to close that. Then
I can say class name flex. The first
thing inside of the stiff will be a span
that says Clintbar ID. Then we can just
format this a little bit nicer. So I'll
just take the same things as we did up
here right there. Paste that down as the
classes. Then I can put in an anchor. So
a link. So I'll say anchor. And then we
can put in comparison variant. Clintvar
ID. Then I also want to put in an icon.
So external link.
And this should have the class name
ML1 inline block H2 with two. So it'll
look like this. And then we just need to
format that. So we already have another
link that actually looks like this. And
that is the orange one up here. So we
can just search for what that links to.
And it's something like uh cleanvar and
then slash perfect. That is the one
right here. That is what it will refer
to. So I'll just copy that. And then in
the anchor we can put in a href and just
paste in the link. And this just needs
to be a formatted string instead. So
we'll need to do
that. And let me see. Right now we have
a comma. We don't need that. And this
then needs to be comparison variant.
Clint ID in
step. We'll then also color this a
little bit. So I'll say class name and
then text extra small text and we'll use
the orange color again. So
D8246. I'll save that. So now we have
this link. And whenever we hover it, I
would like to put in an underline. So
when we hover it, we see the underline
like this. And lastly, I'll just put in
target. That should be underscore blank.
This means it'll open up in a new tab if
we do click it like this. Great. So now
we can just say item center
here. Save that. So you can see the
difference. If I remove that, then we
can see that it is a little bit above
the center. If I then put put in items
center over here, it is then centered
vertically along with the text right
here. So that is what we wanted. I'll
then just make this a little bit bigger
as well. So instead of H2 and H and with
two, I'll put in A3. And then I'll just
put in the same orange color right here.
Save that. So now it looks way nicer in
my opinion. Cool. So with this done, we
can go ahead and put in the actual
comparison results. So under the variant
information. So under this diff right
here, we can put in another diff and
call this
variant results. And this will just
needs to be need to be a diff as
well. So I think we put it one level too
high. So it needs to be inside this
space Y. So, it actually is. So, that is
perfect as far as I can
see. Now, for the class name, I'll say I
think we'll just leave that out. We
don't really need that. I'll put in an
H4. We can just copy that H4 from up
here and then call
it
analysis
comparison. So, we'll have another page
right below or sorry, another section
right below. Then, we'll also have a
card and a grid. So we have the same
thing right up here. So the grid I'll
just copy to my clipboard and then hop
down here below the analysis comparison.
I'll then just put in a
div and then put in the grid right
inside of
that and then close down this diff. Now
the outer diff will have rounded
MD border
border 3 C 4 D sorry it is it is going
to be 3 C 4F and then 3D at 10 and then
we'll just say BGY and P4 so it'll look
like this and then the first column is
going to be the clinical variant
assessment so not the one we're
currently doing ourselves with EVO 2.
This is what we compare against. So
first we'll say
div. Then we can say class name rounded
medium
background E9
EA at 50 and then we can say P4. I'll
then put in an H5 in here. So heading
five and then we'll put in clean var
assessment as the text and then just
style this H5. So I'll say class name
then I'll do margin bottom two. I'll do
flex items center. I'll put in gap 2
text extra small font medium and I'll
put in the usual text color. I would
like both the text that says Clintar
assessment but also a circle right next
to that in a a little bit a unique
style. So I'll say span put in another
span into this. The other one I'll say
class
name flex height five width five items
center justify center rounded full as
well as the
background. So this one and then I'll
say add uh 10. And then for the inner
circle we can say class name with oh
sorry with free and height uh three. We
can then also say rounded
full and then put in a background color
again. So it'll look like this. That
that is the circle I am talking about.
Under this I'll then put in the
classification. So I'll
say
div. Inside the div, I'll put in another
div. Oh, inside this div, I'll then put
in another
div. And then I'll just save that. The
outer div will have class MT3 frame. The
inner div will then have some other
classes. First I'll just put in the text
though. So I'll say comparison
variant.cl
classification or
unknown significance if that is not
there. So now we can see the styling
while we actually do it. So first I'll
say class name right here. Make it a
conditional or sorry a string that is
formatted. So we can use conditions
within it and then say w fit. So with
fit so it fits the text. Then we can put
in rounded
medium px 2 py 1. We'll put in
text extra small font normal and then
for the conditional right here we'll put
in get classification color classes and
pass in the comparison variant dot
classification. When I then save this we
can see likely benign and it looks like
it does over here inside this table. So
this is the clinical variant assessment
over here from the database. But we also
need to put in the EVO 2
prediction. So I'll just make this a
comment say
diff. I'll just need to add a in tag
class name
rounded medium. We can then also put in
bg e9 ea at 50% opacity with a padding
of four. I'll then just make this a
little bit larger over here so they are
side by side like we would see it on a
proper screen size. I'll then just copy
this circle we did up here from the H5
and paste it in right here. And then
change this background to DE 82 46. So
it'll be a orange circle instead. Then
I'll also just change this to EVO2
prediction and save that. Then under
this H5 I'll put in another
div. Inside this div I'll say class name
MT3. I can then put in one more
div and close that as well. I think we
closed it too many
times. Oh no, we actually did not. And
then we can say class name inside this
div. First of all, we would like to put
in
a comparison variant evo2 result.
prediction. That is the first thing. And
I would like to also just put in the
shield we saw up here. So I'll put in
the
shield as well as a class name. So I'll
say height free sorry width free and
height free like
that. Oh sorry that is going to be class
name not
classification. Then I can just import
the
shield. It seems like we'll need to do
the analysis once again because it
reloaded over here. So I'll just reload
this analysis and then just continue
here while we do that. So for coloring
this shield and also the prediction so
it looks like the shield that will pop
up right here. We can put in this class
name. I'll first of all make this a
dynamic formatted string. And then we
can put in flex with fit items center.
We'll just need to remove this quote
right there. We can put in gap one
rounded medium px2 py1 text extra small
font
normal. We can then also put in this
formatted one called get classification
color classes. And here we'll pass in
the comparison variant evo2 results dot
prediction. And now it'll look like it
does out here. Then down here we'll put
in the delta
score. So this will be another
div also with margin top
three. Inside here I'll say div and just
close this one too. Class name margin
bottom one text extra small text with
the usual color. So let me just see if I
can find that. maybe right there at 70%
opacity. Inside here, we'll then put in
delta like lehood score like this. And
then under this, I'll put in one more
div. So I'll say
div. I can then say class name
text small font medium. And then I can
put in the comparison variant that evo 2
results delta score. And then I'll just
say two fixed. and then put in six. So,
maximum six decimal points. This means
that the the delta likelihood score is
going to look like that. And then I'll
just put in some text that annotates
what this actually means. So, what a
negative score means and what a positive
score means just so the user can kind of
get a feeling of what this means and how
bad it is or good it is. So, we'll put
in a
div. Then, I'll say class name text
extra small text. And then I'll pass
in the color and I'll say 60. Then I'll
say comparison variant evo2
results dot delta score. If that is less
than zero, we'll then print out the text
negative score
indicates loss of function. If it is a
positive score, what we'll then print
out is
positive score
indicates gain neutral function because
that is what it means. And then if you
remember this confidence which we
calculate, we can use that to show a
pretty cool bar. So we'll say
confidence bar and just comment this in.
Then we can say
div, give it the class name free. Under
this we'll put in another div. Let me
just copy this class right there. Let me
just copy the entire thing actually. And
this one should then be called
confidence. I'll then just put in a div
below that. So
div. I'll say class name MT1 H2 with
full
rounded full. And I'll put in a
background color of E9 EA at 80%
opacity. In here, I'll then just create
another element. So I'll say
div. And then we'll say class name. Make
that a dynamic formatted string. Then I
can say H2 rounded full. I can then say
if the comparison variant evo2 results
do prediction.includes includes if it
includes
pathogenic, then we would like to use
the color right here. So that's going to
be BG red 600. Otherwise, if it is
benign because it can only be pathogenic
or benign, then we'll just use BG
green 600 like that. And then the actual
width of the bar will need to determine
based on the style property. So I'll say
style pass in the dictionary of CSS
properties. Then we can say
width and then the width will be
calculated
from math minimum. So minimum between
100 or comparison variant evo2 results
dot classification confidence times 100.
And then we'll just pass in a percentage
sign after that. So now the confidence
will look like this. And we'll also just
show the confidence right after. So I'll
say diff and then we can put
in let me just see
math.ound and we'll put in comparison
variant. Evo2 results classification
confidence times 100. After this we'll
put in a percentage sign. And then I'll
just format that. So I'll say class name
MT1 text right text extra small and then
the usual text
color at 60%. So it'll look like this.
The confidence and also the bar with it.
Then below both of these columns right
here I would like to put in one more
diff. So this box should contain the
assessment agreement. So either this
should print out something like EVO 2
prediction agrees with clinark
classification or if they are not the
same it should print out something like
EVO2 pred prediction differs from clinar
classification. So I'll hop under right
here and then I'll say
ss me
agreement. Make that a comment. Put in a
diff. I'll then say class name
MT4 rounded medium. Background is going
to be E9 EA at 20%. I'll say padding
three. Text extra small and leading
relaxed. Inside this div, we can say
another one of course along with its
closing
tag. I'll then call this class name flex
items center gap 2. Then we'll create a
circle inside of this. So I'll create a
span. This span should have the class
name and the circle should be colored
based on the classification. So we can
say flex age h5 width five items center
justify
center rounded full. We'll then also
just pass in comparison variants do
classification dot to
lowerase. So if the classification from
the um database and I'll just say to
lowerase to just always match them. If
that matches the comparison variant evo2
results prediction to lowerase as well
then what we can use is going to be bg
green 100 otherwise we'll use bg yellow
100 like this. So this because they
match will be a green circle right now.
Then inside of this we can then put
in if comparison. Let me just take this
entire
statement and just copy that. We then
paste this in. Put in the conditional
again and then say if they do match
we'll put in a check mark. So an icon
with the class name
H3 with free text green 600.
Otherwise, if they do not match, we'll
put in a
span. So, just a span
element. Inside the span, we should put
in a paragraph that has a exclamation
mark like this. So, either it'll be a
check mark or an exclamation mark. Then
for this band I can say class name flex
height free width three items center
justify center text yellow 600 I'll then
save that and now we have a check mark
but you see it isn't quite centered on
the x-axis and that is because we
misspelled justify as justify something
else. So I'll just save that and now it
should be correctly aligned as it is
supposed to be. Then I'll just take this
statement once again and then under this
span I'll put in one more. So I'll say
span I'll then put in the statement. So
if it is there then I'll print out EVO2
pred
prediction agrees with clinical variant
classification. Otherwise, if they do
not agree, I'll put in EVO2
prediction differs from clinical variant
predict or classification. And then I'll
just format this a little bit. So I'll
say class name font medium and I'll say
text
#3c 4f 3D and save that. So this is then
what it is going to look like. Now down
in the bottom I'll just create a model
footer. So this model footer will
consist of a div with a button inside of
it. This button should say close and
then for the class name I'll say flex
justify end to center it or sorry to
justify it at the end. So to position it
at the end of the model on the X-axis.
So justify end border top border is
going to be # freezy for 3D at 10%
opacity only. Background is going to be
#
E9A at 30% opacity. And I'll put in a
padding four as well. So padding four.
Save that. And now we see this kind of
footer with a border and then also a
gray background color. And then for the
button itself, I'll say variant is going
to be outline on
click is going to be on
close. And then for the styling, I'll
say class name cursor pointer. I'll put
in a border as well. That is going to be
this
one. at 10% opacity bg white. The text
color is going to be this one
again. So this one and then I can say
hover
bg E9 EA at 70%. So that is what the
button is going to look like. Then when
I do go ahead and click it, it'll close
down the modal. So we can close it both
from here and from here. And then we can
see the results and they will be shown
both on mobile and this is the way it'll
look or on larger desktops like this
will always be centered in the middle of
the screen. And then I I've just ran the
analysis on all of these different ones
just to find one that is uh that
differentiates or sorry where the
results from 2 are different from those
from the database. So this one for
example. So if I click compare results
we can then just check out what that
looks like. So we see uncertain
significance right here. Then we see the
exclamation mark as well as EVO 2
prediction differs from ClinVar
classification. So that is just to show
you what look if it what it look like if
they do not match in their predictions.
Cool. So that should be it for the
variant comparison model right here. So
what we can then do is hop back in close
that go into the gene viewer. In here we
can create the card for actually doing a
manual variant analysis by putting in a
position along with the mutation that
you would like to create. So to do this
first I'll hop into components then
create a new file called variant
analysis.tsx tsx and here we can then
say const variant analysis is equal to a
new component and then we'll just return
a rag fragment for now and then say
export default variant analysis like
this then we can just take this
component hop back into the gene viewer
and then place this at the top. So we'll
place it like this. Import it. And now
we should be all good. And then we can
just create the properties that we'll
need to pass down to the variant
analysis card right here. So I'll just
define the properties along with their
type definitions. So first we'll have
the gene which is going to be gene from
search. We'll then also have the genome
ID which is going to be a string. We'll
have the chromosome which will also be a
string. We'll then have
a clinical
variant
variance like that. It'll be an array of
clinical
variance like this. Then we'll have a
reference sequence that is going to be
string or null. We'll then have the
sequence
position that is going to be number or
null. And then we'll have the gene
bounce which is going to be gene
bounce or null like
this. And let me see if we can import
this like that. Then we can just go
ahead and dstructure these properties.
So I'll do this this and then for the
rest of the properties as well.
reference
sequence sequence
position and lastly the gene bounds as
well. Cool. Then inside the component
I'll go ahead and return a card. So
hopping down here we can return a card
from UI card. We can put in the card
header like that. We can also put in a
card title. Inside the card title I'll
put in variance analysis like this. Then
for the card, I'll say gap zero, border
none, bg white, py zero, and shadow
small. Save that. Then for the card
header, we'll put in
pt4 padding bottom two. So you see
there's a little bit more spacing now.
Then for the card title, I'll put in
text
small. I'll also put in font normal and
text 3C 4D.
Sorry, it is 3C 4F and then 3D at 70%
opacity. So, it'll look like this. Now,
then for the actual card contents, under
the card header, I'll put in a card
content. In here, I'll put in the class
name PB4.
Inside the G contents, I'll put in a
paragraph and say, "Predict the
impact of genetic variance using the EVO
2 deep learning model like this. And
then we just need to style that to match
the rest of the style. So we'll say
margin bottom for text extra small. And
we'll put in the text color as well. And
that is just going to be this one again.
and I'll say at 80% opacity. So it'll
look like that. Then we can put in a div
right beneath this. So I'll say div
class name flex flex wrap items
in and gap 4. Inside this I'll put in a
another div first of all. So I'll put in
a div and then a label for the input
field. The label should contain
position. And then under this label
we'll need a input field. So first I'll
just style the label a little bit.
Margin button four. Sorry, one to just
space this out a little bit from the
actual input field. And then I can say
block text extra small and I can put in
the text color as
well. So I'll just say at 70%. And then
under the label I'll put in an input
from shhaten. Then I'll just close it
like that. Say uh wait a second. We'll
just need to define a use state for
storing the actual position. So right
now we have an input field but we also
need to store the state. So up here I'll
say use client because we are using
states. Then I'll say const and then
variance position set
variance position is equal to use
state and then we'll use a string to
represent this position and then the
default value should be gene
bounce and then we can say dot minimum
dot two
string and if that is not defined for
some reason because it uh we have the
optional chaining right here. Then we'll
use an empty string. So just an empty
input field instead. Cool. With this
done, we can then hop down to the input
and then we can define the value which
is going to be the v position. We can
define the on change that is going to be
and let's create a function called
handle position
um change and we can just hop up and
create that function. So up here I'll
say const handle position change. we'll
receive a react event. So, reacts dot
change event. This is going to be an
HTML input
event. In here, I'll just open up the
function. And first, I'll say set
variant position to
E.target. We can then also quickly
create two use states for storing the
variant reference and the variant
alternative as well as the variant
results which we'll show within this
card. So I'll say const and then
variance
reference and then I can say set variant
reference. I'll then say is equal to use
state. This will just be an empty
string. We'll then just copy this line
and call this variant
alternative. In here we'll say set
variant alternative. And then we'll
create one more use state. So this is
going to be variance result. So the
results of the analysis we can then say
set
variance result as well and this will be
equal to a use
states and the use state can either
contain an analysis results or it can
contain null if the analysis has not
been performed yet and obviously it'll
be null per default because the analysis
hasn't been performed before the button
has been clicked. So hopping down here
whenever the position is changed I'll
just go ahead and set the variant
reference to nothing as well. So
whenever the position changes, the old
variant reference or sorry the variant
reference isn't currently matching the
variant position. So I'll just go ahead
and reset that so we don't show old data
for the new position. And now that we're
up here, I'll create some more use
states. The first one will be is
analyzing and then set is analyzing
which will be equal to use state which
will just be a boolean that is false per
default. And then also create one for
variant error and set variance error.
This will also just be a use
state that can be a
string or it can be null if there is no
error. This will just be null by
default. Then we can just hop back down
to the input field and then style that a
little bit. So I'll say class name H8
with 32 border. The border should be 3C
for F 3D again. And then add 10. And
I'll then say text extra small like
that. So now we have an input field that
matches our style a little bit more.
I'll then just copy this entire div
right here and then paste it
down or sorry the inner div right there
and then paste this inner div down and
then say alternative. So this will be
the second input field. So that is going
to be the variant. So the nucleotide
that you would like to change the
reference to. So the value for this one
should be variant alternative. And we
can then say the the onchange. So the
onchange will receive an event in here.
We can then say set variant alternative
to e dot oh
e.target dot value dot to
uppercase like this. And then for the
input we can also
um say placeholder. Placeholder can be
eg like this. And we can then also say
max length is going to be just one
character because a nucleotide is only
one character. And the class name can
then oh the class name can then again we
do have this actually. So we don't need
to change the class names. I'll then
just hop up to the variant reference and
set that to an a. Scroll back down and
then we can show a little annotation
that shows what you're changing from. So
the reference and what you're changing
to. So the alternative. So I'll just put
in a conditional here where we check if
we have a variant reference. If we have
a variant reference then I'll return the
following
div. The div should have the class
name margin button two flex items center
gap two text extra small and
text the text will be 3C 4F 3D. So I'll
save that. Inside this div, I'll put in
a span that is
says
substitution. I'll save this. Then I'll
put in a span right below this. This
span should contain another span. Also,
another span. I'll put in the variant
reference right here. So, it'll be an A.
Then I can give it some classes. The
first class is going to be font medium.
And the second class is going to be the
color of the actual nucleotide. So that
will then be get
nucleotide color class where we pass in
the variant reference. This should then
call this red right here because there's
an A. Then what I'll do is just hop into
the browser and search for right arrow
symbol. And then we can copy this symbol
right here. Hop back in and then put in
a span. So I'll say span. Put in the
arrow. Save that. And now we have a
small arrow. Then I can take this span
right here. Paste it down below. And
then we'll just say variant alternative
for this one. And variant alternative
down here as well. Then when I put in
something like a t, we can then see a
becomes at. When I put in a, a becomes
an a, etc. And then for a d, it is gray
because that really doesn't exist. So
that is exactly what we wanted. And then
another cool thing we'll we'll just do
is say if varant alternative is there
then we'll show that otherwise we're
going to go ahead and show a question
mark like that. So if we do not input
anything we'll see a question mark
indicating that the user should actually
input something right here such as a G
or an A etc. And then with with this
done we can go ahead and put in a button
for doing the actual analysis. So in
this button I'll say if we are analyzing
so is analyzing then I would like to
show a span saying something like
analyzing so analyzing otherwise if we
are not currently analyzing I'll say
analyze variance like this I'll just
import the button and then we can go
ahead and customize this a little more.
So first of all right here I'll put in a
span and this should be a span with a
spinner. Then right outside I'll say
analyzing like this dot dot dot and if
we set is analyzing to true just to test
it out. We can then just see what it
looks like while we're designing it. So
right now it says analyzing. Then for
the text or sorry the span which will be
the spinner I'm going to say class name
and I'll put in mR2 inline block. I'll
put in H4 width four animate spin to
make this spin. I'll put in rounded full
save that then we can say border
two border
whites border top transparent and align
middle like this. So this looks pretty
garbage to be honest and that is because
I put in rounded roll instead of rounded
full. So now it looks like something
that is an actual spinner. So that is
exactly what we wanted. Cool. Let me
just see if I spelled the rest of this
correctly and it seems like I did. So
that is great. And then let me
just make this go back to is analyzing.
So I'll save that. And now we can see
the analyze variant button again. Then
I'll say class name
H8
cursor pointer background 3C 4D 3 oh
sorry for F 3D and then I'll say text
small sorry extra small text white
hover and then we'll use the same
background just with a slight color
difference. So I'll make it down to 90%.
Then we'll also put on some more things.
I'll
say disabled and we'll disable this
button if we are currently analyzing. So
if is
analyzing or not variant alternative. So
if this field right here hasn't been
populated yet. This means that if I hop
over here and then say t we are able to
analyze. If I say a we are able to
analyze etc. I'll just do one more thing
though. I'll make sure that it is
disabled whenever the position is there.
whenever the position has not been
populated yet as well. So I'll say
position. Let me just see what it is
called up here. Varant position. So I'll
scroll down. Then we can only use this
button whenever
the position and alternative has been
filled in. So this just needs to be
negated. So if it is not filled in. So
if I take a
position and then I take a
variant now we will be able to actually
click this button. Now we can go ahead
and define the function that is being
run whenever we click the button. So
that is going to call the handle variant
submit function. So we'll
say const handle variant submit. This
will call our endpoint on modal and run
the inference with evo 2 to actually
determine a prediction. So I'll say is
equal to an async function where we have
a position that is a
string and we also have an alternative
which is a string. So this is the
mutation and this is the position of the
mutation that corresponds to the two
input fields right here. Good. This
function will first in this function
will first do some input validation. So
I'll say con position is equal to pass
int position. So we'll just pass this to
an integer just to make sure it is not a
string for example because then we can't
really use it. Then I'll say if is not a
number
position if that is the case we can say
set variant error to please enter a
valid position
number in here. We can then also say
return. Then what I'll do is check
whether this alternative nucleotide
inputed is one of the four nucleotides.
So ac. So I'll say const and then define
a reax for validating those. So valid
nucleotides is equal to a reax. So I'll
do forward slash and then this upp right
here. Then I'll put in a tg and c. So
one of these. Then I'll end the reax.
Now I can say
if not valid nucleotides test. And then
we test whether the alt is one of these.
Then I'll say set variant error to
nucleotide must be a
c g or t and then we can just return
because then we won't do any of the
logic below this as well. Now I can say
set is analyzing is true. So these are
the guard statements. They'll just check
if our information is correct before
doing the analysis and then if these
pass then we can go ahead and do the
actual analysis. So this will be set to
true after this point. Then I can set
the variant error to null because now if
we do reach this point there aren't
really any errors. So we just remove any
current errors that are already there.
Then I'll put in the try catch to do the
actual analysis. So try catch inside the
catch. I'll catch an
error and we can do a finally where we
set is analyzing to false.
Inside the catch, what we'll do is say
console
error and we'll error the error like
this and then also set variant error
just so the user know an error happened
and then we'll show failed to analyze
variance. Then inside the actual try
we'll say awaits analyze varant variant
with API we'll pass in a
position along with a alternative which
will be alternative to alt we'll pass in
a genome ID which will just be genome ID
and we'll pass in the chromosome and
then I'll just say await correctly and
then we can dstructure the output. So
this will be const data and we actually
don't really need to dstructure this
because this is an analysis result. So
right after doing this call we can say
set variant um
results like this and then we can pass
in the data. Now we have the variant
result stored in a use data pair so we
can go ahead and show it on the screen.
Then we can take this function we just
created and call it down when the button
is clicked. So scrolling down to where
we defined the button, we can put in an
on click and then when we do click, so
I'll just say on click right here, we'll
run this function and then we'll pass in
the variant
position.replace all and we'll replace
all the commas with empty strings. So
this means that if you put in something
like this for example, this will always
also be valid just because these commas
will be removed as well. Then we can
also pass in the next parameter which
will be the variant alternative. And
then this should do it for being able to
analyze a variance. Then under this
button down here and this section in
general, we can put in a box that
appears if you enter a position of a
variant that is already known and that
we have the information about in our
system. So to do this, we can find out
if there is a match and we'll do this
down here. So first we'll check if there
is a variant
position. If there is a variant
position, then we'll say and clinical
variance filter. We can then say
variance where
variance dot variation type dot to
lowerase. Then we'll say
dotinccludes and then single because we
only want to do it for single nucleotide
variants because we won't be able to
analyze these other types of variations
anyways. So we'll just search for single
nucleotide or not search we'll check for
whether the title of the type includes
single nucleotide. If it does, we can
then say and and then check if the two
positions match between the position up
here and then the position of the
variant that was of one of the variants
that we know down here. So we'll say and
pass integer and we would like to first
pass the
variant dot location and then we can say
dotreplace all and we would like to
replace the commas with just uh nothing
and then we can say that needs to be
equal
to and I'll just take the same logic
right
here and this needs to be equal to the
variant position from the input field up
And then we can say dotreplace all. And
then we just do the exact same thing.
Now what we can then do is say dot
map. And then we'll just take the first
uh the first one right here. So the
reason we're taking the first element of
the matches from the filter back here.
So this filter will then return us a
list of matches. And the reason we're
taking the first one that we match that
we map is because we might have multiple
mutations to the same position just by
uh just having different alternatives.
So this location is supposed to to be a
G, but there could be a mutation both
for an A or for a T or for a C that the
G is then changed to. So this leaves us
with four different possibilities and
we'll just show the first one. So what
I'll do inside this map is then say
matched variant because this is a
matched variant. Then I can return some
HTML for each of these. So in here first
I'll do some JavaScript. So I'll say
const riff alternative match. And then
we can just say
title match and just copy this logic
which we have done
before. Hop back in
here. Just paste that in. And now we
should have the reference and also the
alternative from the title of the
variant. This will need to be matched
variant of course though. So I'll say
match variant thetitle match. And then I
think I'll just hop back in here and
just take this if statement and then we
can do this. And then I'll say let ref
be equal to null. And I'll say let alt
be equal to null as well. And then in
here I would like to
say let uh ref be equal
to the ref and then let the alt be equal
to the alts down here instead. So this
one. And then to remove all of these red
arrows, I'm just going to go ahead and
return something. So I'll just return a
rag fragment right now so we don't have
to look at that. It is kind of ugly. And
now if both are null, then we probably
won't have anything to render. So we'll
just go ahead and say if not ref or not
alt then we'll just return null. So
return nothing and don't render
anything. Otherwise we'll return a diff.
So in here I'll say return diff. And
then because we're inside a map right
here we'll need to put in a key or
specify key. The key is going to be
matched variance dot matched variant
clinical variation ID. And then we can
apply some styling. So I'll go ahead and
specify the class name as well.
MT4 rounded MD border a border color as
well. That is going to be 3C for F 3D at
10. And the background is going to be E9
EA at 30%. And we'll specify a padding
for as well. Then we'll just hop in and
find one of these we can test with. So,
I'll just grab the first one and input
that one's location. And we're getting
an error over here where it can't uh
read this uh clean my variance because
it is undefined. So, what I'll do is
just hop up here to clean my variance
and just give it a default value of just
an MC array. Then we hopefully won't get
this error unless it is still undefined,
which it shouldn't be. So, now putting
in the location right there. And I also
completely forgot up here at the gene
viewer, we forgot to actually pass down
the um pass down the parameters or the
properties. I'll just see what this
error is right here and then try and fix
that. Use type. Great. And then we can
hop back in here and then just specify
the different attributes. So gene is
going to be gene. The genome ID is going
to be genome ID. The chromosome is going
to be gene dot chromosome. Clinical
variant ID is going to be cleanbar
variance. The reference sequence is
going to be a state variable which will
track up here that will track off the
active sequence and reference
nucleotides. So I'll just scroll down
and then create a new one. So I'll
say const active sequence
position and set active sequence
position. This will be a use state that
can either be a number or null. And
we'll just set this to null per default.
Then I'll copy this line and then call
this
active reference
um uh
nucleotide. And then just a setup for
that as well. And this should also be a
not a number but a string. And then
it'll just be null per default. Then
going down we can say that the reference
sequence is going to be reference or
active
reference nucleotide and the sequence
position will be the active sequence
position. The gene bounds will just be
gene bounds as we know
it like that and then we should be able
to actually have this work whenever we
render it out over here. So if I go
ahead and try out the example, enter a
position of a variant we know, we are
now able to see this gray box which is
the only thing we we return. If we then
say eight instead, then the box is gone
because there isn't really any mutation
or any variance matching that position.
Then we can also just try and remove the
commas and it still works. We can also
remove one of them and it still works
because we are removing the commas up
here with replace all. What I'll then do
is hop into this diff which we created
and create another one. Say class name
margin bottom free flex items center and
justify between like this. Inside this
div, I'll put in an h4 and I'll say
known variance detected. Save that. Then
we can just style this as well. So I'll
say text small font medium and I'll give
it a text color. So
3C 4F 3D and then I'll save that. Now
under this H4, we can put in a span that
says
position along with a for spacing right
here. Then we can put in the location.
So I'll go ahead and say pass or I don't
have to do that actually. I can just say
matched variants dot and then location.
And now we see the position over here as
well. Then for the span, I'll say class
name, text extra small. Then we'll just
give it this color, but tone it down to
70%. So text extra small. Then we'll
tone this down. Save that. And now it'll
look like this. Then we can go ahead and
put in a grid with the information. This
will have two columns. So I'll say grid
gap four. Then on medium sizes or above,
we'll say grid columns two. Inside this,
we'll put in a an empty div and then a
div that says variant details. I'll save
that and give it some class names. We'll
have margin bottom one, text extra
small, font medium, and we'll give it a
text color as well. And that is going to
be this
one. Then we can say 70% opacity to just
tone it down. Now under this variant
details I I'll put in the matched
variant title. So I'll say matched
variants dot title and I can say class
name text
small like that and then under this diff
we can put in one more or we say class
name
uh margin top two and text small. So
when I save that it'll look like this.
And then I can put in a gene dot symbol
along with the variant position. So
variant position right here. Then I can
put in a for spacing. And under that put
in a span where we say font
mono. Inside this span we can put
in one more span. And this one should
have the reference. And we'll just style
this a little bit. So I'll say class
name and then pass in the color class.
So we'll use get nucleotide color class.
Pass in the ref. Then we can copy this
and pass in the alt. Copy this and
remove the class name. And then we can
pass in this larger than sign like this.
So now we can see what it is changed
from and what it has changed to. We just
need to call this alt though to make the
colors actually work. Then under this
diff right here, I'll put in another
div. Inside this div, I'll say clinva
classification. And then I'll just make
this with some classes. So I'll say M1
text extra small. And then give it a
text color as
well. And I'll tone it down to
70%. Copy this one up here and save
that. Then under the clinical variant
classification, I'll put in a span here.
I'll put in the matched variant cut
classification like that or I'll say
unknown if it's not
there. Then for the span I'll give it
some classes too. I'll make this dynamic
and then I'll say ml1 rounded
smx1 and py of 0.5. And then for the
dynamic part I'll insert a variable
which contains the CSS classes. This
comes from get classification color
classes which we created from match
variants.cl classification. So now we
can have this color around the box as
well just like we do down here. And I
think I'll just make this two instead of
one just so it looks like it does down
here just a little more. Then what I
would like to do is to create a button
over here that looks like these buttons
that says analyze with EVO 2. But this
button should say something like analyze
this variant instead. This means that
you can actually analyze this specific
variant. So this will just insert the A
into the alternative box and then press
analyze for you automatically. So you
don't have to do that. So it basically
just makes it easier for you to analyze
variants that already exists if you do
enter them into the position field. So
first I'll hop down to right here. I'll
then put in a div. In this div we'll
have the class names flex items center
justify end. And then we'll scroll up to
where we created this button. And then
this then just copy the entire button,
hop down into the div and paste it in
and press save. And then I'll say
analyze
uh this variant instead. So I'll say or
actually I'll change it a little bit. So
I'll put in a rack fragment. So we can
have multiple items inside this
conditional. Then I'll say seap. So put
in a seap icon from Lucid React with the
class names Mr. one
inline block H3 with free and then next
to this app I'll put in
analyze this
variant and just make this variant upper
case like this analyze this
variant then I'll make everything a
little bit smaller so I'll say h free
with free Mr1 in step this should be
fine fine. Then hopping up to the button
styling itself, I'll make this height
seven. I'll make the variant outline. So
I'll say
varants outline. Save that. I'll make
the size
small. And then I would like to change
the background to E9 EA. And I would
like to change the background when you
hover it to at 10%. But this keep this
one still. And then for the text, I
would like to change that to the color
we always use, that one. So I'll just
use that for the text and save. And now
we have this button that says analyze
this variant. It is disabled though,
which it should not be. So I would like
to only disable it if is analyzing is
currently true because you don't really
need to enter anything to to click this
button. And then I'll just apply a
border styling as well. So I'll
say border and then I'll tone this down
to 20. And then we have this button
right here which we can hover and then
also click analyze this variant with. If
we do then click it. I would like to
just change this a little bit. So put in
some curly braces so we can have
multiple lines inside this on click and
then paste this back in and then say set
variant alternative to alternative. And
then we'll just call handle variant
submit again but we'll say alt down here
and then just pass the value from the
alternative. So this map function that
what this map function returns directly
into the handle variant submit because
if we call this variant alternative this
set variant alternative that is a use
state setter. So this might take a while
to update and this means that this might
be called before it updates and then
it'll use an old variant alternative
value for this actual submit but we want
to use the newest one but still set
this. So we'll just call it with the
value we have directly and then set this
in the meantime in the background. So
that is why we set it with this and then
set this before. If I then just hop over
here and click analyze this variant, we
see that it is analyzing. It is
analyzing and this alternative was
automatically set to a which is a what
comes from the variant down here. So
that seems to be working. Now the next
thing I would like to do is just put in
the error state. So I'll say if variant
error and and then I'll put in a diff
here. I will put in the variant error
and then I'll say class name
MT4 rounded MD background red 50 I would
like to put in a padding of three text
extra small text red is 600 and save
that. And now if we do have an error,
let me just check. If I do
true and then I make this a string, that
is what the error is going to look like
and where it is going to be. So that was
just for demonstration analy sorry.
Anyways, right now we just ran this
analysis but we didn't see any results
and that is simply because we didn't put
in anywhere to show the results. So down
here we can say variant results because
remember we have this use state up here
for storing the result. So it is
automatically stored and now I just need
to show it. So if the variant results
then we'll put in a diff with the class
names MT6 rounded medium border and then
border
3C 4F 3D toned down to 10%. We'll put in
a background 2 of E9 EA at 30%. And
we'll put in a padding of four. Then
inside this div because we do have
result right now. So that is why we see
it rendering out like we do right there.
Inside this I'll put in an H4 that says
um
analysis results. And we'll just style
this a little bit. So I'll say MB free
text small font medium. And then I'll
put in a text color as well. Uh this
one. Save that. Under this H4, we'll put
in a div with a grid of two columns. So
we'll have a grid gap of six. On larger
devices, we'll have grid columns 2.
Inside this, I'll put in an empty div.
Inside this div, I'll put in a div with
the class name margin bottom two. Then
I'll put in a text inside of this. So
I'll just make this a div for now and
call it
variants with the class names. text
extra small font medium text and then 3C
4F 3D at
70%. Then we can and this needs to be a
free C not an EC. So this right here
then under this variant I would like to
put in one more diff say class name
text small then I can put in
the gene dot symbol and I can put in
the
variance results
position a forced spacing right here
under this I'll put in a span inside the
span we'll have the variant uh results
do reference
We'll then have the larger than sign and
then we'll have the variance results and
then alternative. If I save that, we can
now see the variant up here. Then what I
would like to do is just style this a
little bit. So I'll say class name font
mono. And now it is in the correct
format that we know. Oh, let me just hop
back to where we
were. So all the way down to font mono
here. Then under this span, I like to
create a new div. So a diff right here.
So span div diff div diff div diff div
diff div diff div diff div diff div diff
div diff div diff div. And then we
create a new div under this. This div
should be empty with one inside of it
saying delta likelihood
score. Uh this needs to be delta not
delta. Then we can say class name text
extra small font medium
text. And then we can say 3C for F 3D at
70%. Like this. Then we can just put in
the delta score. I'll just say diff pass
in the variant results
dot like this. Delta score and then just
to fixed to only keep six decimals. Then
I can say class name text
small. Under this div I'll put in one
more. and I'll say
negative score indicates loss of
function. Then I'll give it a class name
and say text extra small. Put in the
usual text
color. So this one right here. And then
tone it down a little bit. So that is
what you see right there. We have the
header, we have the score and then we
have the annotation um explaining what
the score even means. So negative score
indicates loss of function. Then we can
put in the prediction. So diff div under
free divs. You can put in one more that
is going to be an empty div with another
one inside of it. I'll just copy this
one right here. Paste that in. And then
I'll say confidence and save that. And
then just spell it correctly. Confidence
like that. And then I can put in one
more diff. Say class name MT1 H2 with
full
rounded full
BG E9
EA and save that. So now we have this
confidence bar which we have also
created earlier. Inside of this I'll put
in a div. Here we have a class name.
This is going to be one we can change
with the formatted string. I'll then say
H2 rounded full and then I'll put in the
variant
uh variant results.prediction
prediction. So if we have pathogenic in
the word then we color it
red. So I'll do this. Then we say bg red
600. Otherwise we call the confidence
bar green. BG green 600. And then the
length of the bar will be determined
based on this style property. So I'll
pass in this CSS dictionary. Then say
width. pass in a format string which
will calculate from math minimum 100. So
it can maximum be 100 or variance
results dot classification confidence
and then times 100 and then I'll append
a percent percentage sign to that and
save it. And then we can just show the
actual confidence number under that as
well. So I'll say diff and then just put
in math
round and I would like to put in variant
results classification confidence times
100 and then a pen append a percentage
assigned to that as well. So that's
going to be one 100 right here. On a
class name I'll say MC1. I'll say text
rightes. Then I would like to say text
extra small. And we then al also just
put on a text color like this. Turn it
down to 60. So it is going to look like
this. I then want to be able to click a
nucleotide down here. So click this one
for example. then it should scroll up
and focus into this position input and
then also fill out the position for me.
So to do this we need to do a couple of
things both in the var analysis and also
in the gene viewer. So first we need to
scroll all the way up and then we can
export an interface called variant
analysis handle.
This will contain a focus alternative
input which it's going to be a function
that just returns void. Then we can wrap
this entire variant analysis component
in a forward forward ref. So I'll say
forward ref and then say variant
analysis handle and then we just need to
define the props as a type instead. So
hopping up I'll
say
interface variance analysis props just
define this and then this is going to be
the type both here and also defined here
in the forward riff. Then we have to
wrap the entire thing. So I'll add one
more curly brace hop all the way down
and do the same down here like this.
Press
save. And then right there we can
also dstructure the ref. So we can also
get this ref parameter. Then we can
define a ref locally here. So I'll hop
down to our use states. Then say const
alternative input ref will be equal to
use ref html input element. And then
we'll just set this to null. This will
then be a reference to the position
field up here. So scrolling down to our
input variant position, we can then say
ref is equal to alternative input ref.
And then we just need to define in or
implement this interface and define what
happens when this focus alternative
input is called. So we can do that down
here as well. So what we'll do is use a
hook. So we'll say use imperative
handle. Then we can pass in the ref as
well as a
function. Then we can say focus
alternative
input and then if this function is
called we'll say if alternative input
ref current then we'll say alternative
input ref.t current focus. So this means
we'll focus in on the input field that
we saw over here. So that this is focus
right here and this is not focus. So
it'll do this for us basically just
automatically. Then hopping back into
the gene viewer. I'll just save this by
the way. We can scroll all the way up to
our use states and then I would like to
create a new one. So const variant
analysis ref is equal to use ref and
we'll then pass in the variant analysis
handle set this to null.
If we then take this scroll all the way
down to our known variants right here,
we can then pass down the
riff. Oh, sorry. It's going to be not
the known variance, but the variant
analysis right there. We can then pass
down the riff. Let me just see what it
says right here. This probably needs to
be type or something. Yep, it does. And
then if we scroll down to our sequence
component, we have this um on sequence
click. So I'll scroll up to somewhere we
have where we have other sequence logic
right here. Then I'll create a function
handles
sequence click. This will be a use
callback. And then the function which
we'll define is going to take a position
which is a number a nucleotide which is
a string.
And we'll then say set active sequence
um nucleotype plus our position. This
will then just be the
position. Let me just import use
callback if it hasn't. I think we need
to just define the dependency array.
Yeah. And then we also need to set the
active reference nucleotide which will
be the nucleotide right here. Then we
can say window scroll
to. So I'll scroll to the top and then
I'll set this to zero to scroll to the
top. Then I'll say
behavior. I think we need to pass this
in as a dictionary. And then behavior is
going to be smooth. And this needs to
not have a U. Good. So it should scroll
to the top and focus on this input. So
to focus on this input, we'll say if
variant analysis
refur then we'll say variant analysis
ref.curren current focus alternative
input which will then call this function
implementation from in here and then
focus on the actual input field. So now
we just need to take this handle
sequence click hop down to on sequence
click and call that instead and then if
we hop into the variant analysis we can
just put in a use effect. So this use
effect I'll just pass in a dependency
array. So whenever sequence position or
reference sequence updates so these this
is the position and this is then the
reference nucleotide whenever these
updates we'll then update them locally
and store them right here in these two
um use states. So I'll say if sequence
position and reference
sequence. We'll then say set variance
position and we'll set this to a string
of sequence position and we'll say set
variant
reference and we'll set this to the
reference sequence up here. So I'll
press save and then then if I hop over
here and click one of these, it'll focus
in on the position. So I'll just try and
scroll down and click it again. So it
scrolls up for us and then also inputs
the position. That is correct. So if I
click an A right here, we can see that
the reference changes to an A. Then I
can input a T and then we can see what
substitution is taking place. I have
forgotten one thing when I look back and
that is to put in the actual prediction
inside this analysis result. So what
I'll do is just create a div here and
then wrap this entire confidence section
in that. give it a class name of MT3.
And then in here, I'll put in one more
diff. This one will say
prediction and it'll have the
styling like we do right here as well
for confidence. So I'll just put that in
and save that. And then under this we'll
put in one more diff. We'll then say
variant
results.prediction. And I'll just save
that. And now we can see the prediction.
And we just need to go ahead and style
that. So I'll put in some class
names. Then I would like to say inline
block rounded large px3 py1 text extra
small. And then we can put in the get
classification color classes. And then
we can put in the variant results dot
prediction and save that. And now we're
able to see the actual prediction just
like we are down here. So if I do take
one of these locations, insert them in
here, and then I put this to a G for
example, and then say analyze variant,
should be able to see this in just a
second. And it just finished, and now we
see the result down here. So it all
works end to end. Now I also just want
to fix the spelling up here. It says
deep learning model. It should be deep
learning model. So let me just find
leaning. So deep learning with an R.
I'll save that to just make it spelled
correctly. Then the last thing I would
like to do inside the variant analysis
component is the following. So whenever
I click a nucleotide down here, it
highlights the position input field, but
it should actually just highlight the
alternative instead because when you do
pick one down here, you have actually
decided on the position. So it makes
more sense that you want to enter the
alternative. Therefore, this should be
the one that is being focused and not
this one over here. So this is pretty
simple. down here. We'll just need to
change this to the input instead. Then
when I save and click down here, now it
focuses on the alternative input and not
the position. And that is then it for
the variant analysis card. So I'll close
this down along with these other ones
and only leave gene viewer
open. Inside the gene viewer, I would
like to first create a loading state
because right now if we scroll all the
way up, we can see that is loading right
here is not being used. So let's go
ahead and scroll down and implement
that. So if is loading is true then
instead of returning what we return
right here we'll return something else.
We'll return a diff with a div inside of
that. The outer diff should have the
class names flex age 64 items sensor
justify sensor and then the inner div
should have some class names as well.
These should be h eight with eight as
well. animate
spin. It should also have rounded
full border two border gray 300 border T
gray 800. And then if I go ahead and set
this to true, we should be able to see a
loading state. If I hop back in here and
just reload. So then I'll just press
right there. Pick one. And I can see
that I forgot to put in a return
statement right here. So that is why. So
this is going to be how the loading
state will look like. So I'll then say
is loading and only render it if this
loading state is currently active. One
more thing we need to look at is the
following inside variant analysis. TSX.
So let's say we hop into a given gene
like this one for example. We can see
that it starts out with a as the
reference nucle nucleotide. That is
obviously wrong and that is because we
have set the the default value for the
variant reference to a. So we'll just
we'll just go ahead and remove that and
press save. This means we'll start out
with a clean slate every time we press
one of these and then we can press a
position then put in a nucleotide and
then we'll be able to see what it is
supposed to show. So I've created this
section called end notes in this color
draw. And first we're going to talk
about what we can do better next time.
So first as you might have noticed we
have entered in the same colors a lot of
times the that is this specific color
for example but also this specific
background color. So instead of hard
coding these colors every single time
what you can do is in Tailwind define a
theme. So you can define a theme such as
um a color that you call primary text
color or a primary background color.
Then you define this color once and then
you will then be able to say background
and then the name you defined. So then
you can just say background primary for
example or text primary or sorry
background text primary. And this means
you'll avoid having to remember all of
these different color codes and then
also enter enter them every single time.
And if you then decide to change some of
these colors instead of you having to go
into all different files and change them
all, you'll then only need to change the
theme file and then the colors of the
entire application will then be um
updated as well. So that is definitely
something that should have been done
from the start. Next, you can also use
pre-made components. So, instead of
defining this entire component from
scratch and then also coding it because
it is a pretty um complex component, it
is a range slider. You might be able to
find some of these components online
from npm. So, this is React range slider
input. So, we might have been able to
use this instead to avoid all of the
logic behind you behind creating this
ourselves. It is pretty cool to know how
it works though, but you can avoid a lot
of work if you do use npm packages
instead. And then for the exercises down
here, I have divided them into three
different categories. Green are easy,
these are medium, and these take the
longest. So these the red ones are the
hardest ones. The first one is pretty
simple. You just deploy the front end to
versel. You might have to make sure that
the llinter will actually pass before
you can build it and then deploy to Vel,
but it should be a pretty easy task. The
next one that is a little bit harder is
building all around the application. So
you can make this into a SAS product by
building a login system and maybe you
would also like to store the users
history. So history of generated
predictions in a database and then if
you would like to make it into a SAS
product where anybody can just abuse
your endpoints. You might also want to
authenticate your modal fast API
endpoint. Luckily there's already logic
for doing this with modal and they have
some pretty good documentation on how to
secure your endpoints. So that shouldn't
be too hard to do, but it's still a
little bit harder than the green ones.
The next one down here um of supporting
other mutations is by far the coolest
exercise and the one you'll learn the
most from the So right now we only
support single nucleotide variants. So
right here we are able to analyze single
nucleotide variants but not deletions,
duplications, insertion, insertions and
other mutations. So let's say we would
like to support deletions as well. So
right now in the model back end we have
a reference se reference sequence and we
have a sequence with a variant so a
mutated nucleotide. Then the scoring of
both of those sequences is done and then
they are compared. So we take the
difference between the scores. If you
would like to support deletions for the
variant sequence you just remove the
nucleotide that is deleted down here and
then you score both sequences. So the
scoring logic remains the same. So
that's why I say for deletion the
variation sequence should just delete
the reference nucleotide. So nucleotide
but the scoring logic should remain the
same. So then you would also need to
change the front end to also allow
deletions and not just single nucleotide
variants like we do right now. You'll
probably also need some way to
differentiate between what kind of
request you're making to the back end in
modal. So there's a difference between
whether you're doing a single nucleotide
variant and whether you're doing a
deletion for example. So this is
something that the request to the model
backend should also include. But you can
start out by doing a simple one like
deletion and then move on to other ones
and then try out all of these if you
would like to. So these were the
exercises I have for you and this is
then the end of the video. So, thank you
so much for listening along and I hope I
see you in the next video as